Larmonium, or harmonium, is a type of air tank organ with one (or more) keyboards and two pedals to operate the mantics for the air. The sound is produced by one or more rows of free anc, similar to accordion and harmonica by mouth.
In the Hornbostel-Sachs classification, it falls within the family called "series of free-lance aerophones" (code 412.132). Before the invention of the harmonium there was a different organ without reeds, the royal, in which the sound was produced by hinged ances and which gradually fell into disuse after the seventeenth century, long before the invention of the harmonium. In addition to the remarkable timbre difference, a characteristic of the harmonium (like the other free-lance instruments) is the great stability of the tuning, contrary to the regal that must be reaccorded very frequently.
Since the vibration frequency of free ances does not depend on the air pressure (as opposed to what happens in the hinged ances and the labial reeds), the instrument allows to vary the intensity of the sound for expressive purposes, which is impossible in the reed organs. For this purpose, in many instruments (especially in those of French construction) there is a mechanism that blocks the internal mantle, which otherwise keeps the pressure constant, so that the latter is determined directly by the speed at which the performer pushes the pedals alternately.
In the Italian term harmonium are two different types of instrument: the compressed air one, which is lharmonium of French type, and the aspirated air one, which is the American reed organ (but also British and German). In the first case, the mantics pump the air, through a wind chamber of the wind, or "serbatoio" (réservoir, in French), towards the ancestral ones making them vibrate; in the second case, they aspirate the atmospheric air, passing through the ancestral puts them in vibration.
The use of free-wing registers was already experienced in the 18th century by some German and Swedish organaries, and aroused particular interest in the inclusion of such records in the music automaton called Panharmonicon, which made famous its builder J.N. Maelzel following numerous performances in various European capitals and later in New York.
The reed organ was born in the United States in the first half of the nineteenth century (as stated by Gellerman), the final result of a series of experimental instruments (like the "Pan Harmanicon" of Goodrich, of Boston, or the "Seraphine" of Green, of London), probably by such Aaron Merrill Peaseley, also of Boston. The same Gellerman recognizes that there are no documents proof of this attribution, while the first sure producer of American reed organs was James Amireaux Bazin, inventor of Canton, Massachusetts, who built a first specimen of them in 1824. These instruments did not have immediate diffusion so much that in 1846 in all the United States they counted less than three hundred; they were produced by hand in small shops, by craftsmen who therefore built very different types of them for building and materials, often according to the demand. For a production of industrial type on a larger scale, it was necessary to wait the middle of the century, with the affirmation of the first companies and the first ones of factory: the George A.
The French Lharmonium has its predecessor in an instrument invented in 1810 by Gabriel-Joseph Grenié (1757/1837), with the name of the powerful expressif orgue, but it had little diffusion. In 1830 the aristide organaro Cavaillé-Coll produced a more evolved model, with the name poïkilorgue, which attracted among others the attention of Gioachino Rossini. The name harmonium was given to the model created in 1840 by Alexandre-François Debain, which enjoyed a much wider success of its predecessors. Despite Debain's attempts to protect the exclusive use of the name, other manufacturers took advantage of it and throughout Europe this was due to the most notable name of the French Museum. If they produced particularly elaborate examples, from the technical point of view but also aesthetic, for which mention is made of harmonium d'art. Among these, the most notable ones are due to the generic name of the instrument.
Other famous French producers of harmonium were J. Alexandre, Dumont-Lelièvre, Christophe et Étienne, Kasriel, Rodolphe, Richard. The manufacturers Julius and Paul Schiedmayer, formed in the ateliers of Debain and Alexandre, founded in 1853 in Stuttgart the first German company specializing in the construction of this instrument.
Far from being labeled as a poor parent of the organ, the harmony of the French type was thus created a stable place, as well as in the churches, also in the living rooms, next to the piano. For this reason, for this instrument were also written pieces not exclusively relevant to the sacred context, which constitute an important repertoire for quality and musical richness. Composers who wrote specifically for harmonium were Saint-Saëns, Guilmant, Louis James Alfred Lefébure-Wély and, in Germany, Sigfrid Karg-Elert.
Lharmonium francese was resumed in Italy by Graziano Tubi who in 1860 founded a production house of very well-kept instruments for invoice and timbre quality: Tubes, multifaceted personality of entrepreneur, used ancies coming from Paris (the famous Estève ances) and was based on French models for the production of their instruments. The company, based in Lecco, had life until the seventies of the 1900s, before finally closing its business.
Other Italian producers of harmonium (who took the model of both French and American instruments) are Giuseppe Mola (1837-1928, Turin: mention of merit at the Universal Exhibition of Paris, 1867), Egidio Galvan (1873-1944, Trento: bronze medal at the Universal Exhibition of Liège, 1905), the FIP - Fabbrica Italiana Pianoti of Turin, active from 1917 to 1929, Iginio Delmarco and Arcangelo Bozzetta (active in Tesero since 1920), Giovanni Lanzani (active in Seveso since 1926), Achille Radice (active also in Seveso since 1929: also known with the brand AREF), Enrico Ciresa (1922-1991, Tesero, in activity since 1952), Arienti.
The harmonium registers are all anc (free-range) and the timbre is determined by the curvature and shape of the anc; compared to the organ it has a minor timbre variety, but through the register called "Expression" it allows a huge control of dynamic nuances; its mechanical effects are the tremole, the human voice and the smooth. To regulate the dynamics are also used the knees placed on the two sides of the knees, which open and close jealousy and thus allow to graduate the amount of sound produced by the ances. In some models, finally, a central knee allow to insert at the same time all the registers (the great game of "grand jeu").
On many instruments at least one union is available, which works mechanically and also serves to make the notes play at the octave compared to those that are playing. When the unions are two, the first serves for the lower half of the keyboard, the second for the upper one, and allow to play the notes doubling them respectively with the lower octave and the high octave.
Because of the high cost of the necessary specialized maintenance and its difficult availability, as well as the advent of the electronic liturgical organ, the harmoniums have gradually disappeared from the churches or remain unused.
It is similar to the western one, but smaller in size, and was brought to India from the West by Christian missionaries, from about the mid-nineteenth century onwards. Musicians needed an easily transportable instrument to use in religious functions, and found it in this type of harmonium, about as large as an accordion and similar operation. The shape is that of a rectangular cabinet, near the player has a keyboard (piano type) that extends from two to four octaves, and plays with only one hand, while the other hand operates a bellows bellows placed on the side far from the player, in a similar way to the ancient portative organ. The Indian version then has the possibility to put into operation a number of different eddies (constant background notes), omnipresent in Indian classical music (it is operated that corresponding to the tonic of the played piece).
The story of the harmonium in India is closely related to that of the sarangi.
The most important characteristic of the harmonium, compared to the Indian context, is the intonation. Being a Western instrument, it is granted according to the equal temperament, developed in the West for the needs of harmonic-tonal music (i.e. harmony based on chords and modulation from one tonality to another). This type of tuning is completely foreign to Indian music, which is modal and does not contemplate chords or changes in tonic in a musical execution, and is based on numerous and precise nuances of intonation of the sounds of the various scales, which are used (incompatible with our equal temperament).
Roberto Perinu, La Musica Indiana, ed. Zanibon, Padua, 1981
Stuart Isacoff, Temperamento - History of a Musical Enigma, ed. EDT, Torino, 2005
Lantropologia (from the Greek word "studio dell'uomo" and λόγος, logos "discourse," doctrine "literally": "studio dell'uomo" is a scientific branch developed especially in modern times that studies the human being under different perspectives (social, cultural, morphological, psycho-evolutionary, sociological, artistic-expressive, philosophical-religious), investigating his various behaviors within society. Born as an internal discipline to biology, he later acquired an important humanistic value.
There are several areas of anthropology: social anthropology studies models of behavior, while cultural anthropology studies cultural significance, including norms and values. Today the term " sociocultural anthropology" is commonly used. Linguistic anthropology studies how language influences social life. Biological or physical anthropology studies the biological development of human beings.
Archaeological anthropology, however, often defined as "the anthropology of the past," studies human activity through the investigation of physical evidence. It is considered a branch of anthropology in North America and Asia, while in Europe archaeology is seen as a discipline in its own right or grouped in other related disciplines, such as history.
Already the ancient Egyptians had the habit of distinguishing differences between peoples, depicting the enemies captured with a different skin color, such as the Light-skinned Libyans, and also highlighting different customs and physical traits, such as the long beard of the Libyan men themselves, but it will be necessary to wait for the studies of the Greek historian and geographer Herodotus of Alicarnasso, in order to read a description of the characters of various ancient populations (Ethiops, Greeks, Egyptians, Scythians), in which the author distinguished between physical and ethnographic characters.
One of the first precursors of anthropology, in antiquity was Aristotle, who was concerned with classifying the zoological world, including reasonable animal man. The knowledge of human types deepened thanks to the studies of the doctors Hippocrates and Galen and the travelers' stories, from Marco Polo to Magellan.
In the 17th century, in a study on the Antilles, the Dominican father Jean-Baptiste Du Tertre (1610-1687) described the inhabitants of those islands in an anthropological-racial way. In the 18th century Linnaeus established a cataloguing of human varieties based on both the physical and the moral and ethnological characteristics and the 19th century anthropology received a great development thanks to the research provided, a few years earlier, by Buffon (1707-1788), based on the concept of the human race and the theory of adaptation to the various natural environments. Followed Lamarck (1744-1829), Blumenbach (1752-1840), with his descriptive norms of the skull, Paul Broca (1824-1880) and the craniometry, Léonce Manouvrier (1850-1927) with the focus of the relationships between morphology and functionality.
In Italy, in addition to the school leader Justiniano Nicolucci (1819-1904), who in 1857 wrote the first Italian treatise of anthropology and ethnology; Giuseppe Pitrè (1841-1916) considered the most important Italian anthropologist, also Paolo Mantegazza (1831-1910) and Enrico Morselli (1852-1929).
Foundation of anthropology: Morgan and Tylor
The new anthropological science (based on the analysis of the social structures of the archaic peoples) had a promising beginning with Lewis Henry Morgan (1818-1881) and Edward Burnett Tylor (1832-1917), who, in their studies on the amerinds and other primitive populations, revealed the common social structure of tribes of different countries: a structure characterized by a complex system of relationships, often matrilinear and lack of private property and a repressive apparatus (prisons, police, etc.L.H. Morgan, Ancient society, London, 1877; E.B. Tylor, Anahuac, London, 1861). This was for them the primitive state of our civilization, corresponding to the ancient social organization of ancient Greece and ancient Rome.
But this trace, which threatened to undermine morals, private property and the bourgeois state at its very base, was too dangerous for academic anthropologists, missionaries, explorers who had gathered the first direct information about the wild civilizations. Also this task was left to Marx and Engels. For his part, bourgeois science preferred to place itself on the ground of the comparativeism of James Frazer (1854-1941) and Edvard Westermarck (1862-1939) and limit itself to the collection of objects of art and folklore, in search of racial origins through the measurement of skulls. By improving communications and increasing the colonial exploitation that characterized the last decades of the nineteenth century, contacts with primitive peoples multiplied.
And although in most cases these contacts took place solely on the basis of the exploitation and extermination of indigenous peoples, they also made possible a greater knowledge of their customs and beliefs. The first anthropological studies on the spot were those carried out in 1871 by Nikolaj Miklucho-Maklaj (1846-1888) in New Guinea and by a zoological expedition to the Strait of Torres and New Guinea (1898-1899). Of this included Alfred Cort Haddon (1855-1940) and William Rivers (1864-1922). On his song, Robert Henry Codrington studied on the islands of Melanesia, discovering the mana. But neither of these direct observations, which were worth confirming the scheme of tribal organization provided by Morgan and Tylor, was able to give anything but a psychological interpretation, while the economic aspects continued to be neglected.
With the great contribution of scholars like Bronisław Malinowski we will start towards a new anthropological season and we can talk about new models of study. The anthropology moves from the old practice, to be an anthropologist at the beginning of the twentieth century means going towards the realities of which we speak, to verify, to report, to identify ourselves: the so-called participating observation is born, that is, the ability to descend deeply into a social environment different from one's own with the aim of bringing back in an objective and scientific way what is observed. Malinowski was also among the first to use new means to obtain information, for example recording devices, tools for filming and above all the camera. Besides this, the great scholar kept numerous diaries of notes on the Trobriand population (the anthropological locus of Malinowski) that will be published after his death and that revealed the great difficulty of immembearing himself of the anthropologist in contexts far away and very different from his own, in addition to the fact of the impossibility to return objectively certain realities.
In the 1960s and even earlier, the anthropological disciplines underwent further changes, one of the most resounding was the union with linguistics (Sausure's structural linguistics) carried out by Claude Levi Strauss with the aim of overcoming the Western ethnocentric prejudice and arriving at the recognition of the presence of structures common to all men, an idea criticized in a different way from all structuralist posts.
At the same time, from an academic point of view, anthropology is divided, in the tradition of Italian studies, into two main areas:
physical anthropology (or "biological anthropology"), which studies the evolution and physical characteristics of human beings, the genetics of populations and the biological bases of the behaviors of the human species and its closest relatives, the great monkeys (primatology);
the demo-ethno-anthropological disciplines, which deal with socio-cultural aspects, etc. (e.g. social relations networks, behaviors, customs and customs, kinship patterns, political laws and institutions, ideologies, religions and beliefs, patterns of behaviour, modes of production and consumption or exchange of goods, perceptive mechanisms, relations of power). Great importance for this area of study is ethnographic research, often considered as an indispensable basis for theoretical reflections and possible comparisons.
Generally, when the term "anthropology" is used without specifications, it refers to this second group.
The definitions "cultural anthropology" of American derivation, "social anthropology" of British origin, and "ethnology" of French school, are often used to refer generically to the field of studies of anthropological or ethno-anthropological sciences. The use of these labels involves different theoretical readings of anthropology, which can in principle be related to the different traditions of studies. However, there is broad consensus in contemporaryity in identifying a basic epistemological unity of the disciplinary field.
In Italy we tend to prefer the diction "sciences (or disciplines) ethnoanthropological" to avoid the theoretical implications of the choice between ethnology and social and cultural anthropology. In accordance with this tendency the encyclopedic reference voice for this field of study is ethnoanthropological Sciences, and in it is treated the history of discipline.
Given the enormous variety of phenomena that fall within the field of interest of this discipline and following historical evolutions of academic configurations and policies, and not, related to it, proliferate the directions of research and there exists, as a result, a great variety of institutionalized subdisciplines in courses and specializations in universities around the world (to name just a few: visual anthropology; state anthropology; economic anthropology; Amazon anthropology; anthropology of development; anthropology of organizations, etc.).
The great quantity of subdisciplines and fields of interest that characterizes cultural and social anthropology owes its existence mainly to the crisis of two pillars of the theoretical constructions of both: the same concepts of "culture" and "society."
On the other hand, it must be borne in mind that any society expresses itself within a culture and culture creates its own exoskeleton in society. Anthropology is therefore "a knowledge of the frontier," as it is born on the frontier between different cultures.
The traditions of modern thought that can be defined as constituting a philosophical anthropology, have the main exponents in Immanuel Kant, Friedrich Hegel, Johann Gottfried Herder, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Friedrich Nietzsche, Max Scheler, Arnold Gehlen and Helmuth Plessner.
Being human and nature (human species, theories of evolution, comparative primatology, human ecology, paleoanthropology, molecular anthropology)
politics, war, (the quest for power and authority)
Economic anthropology (economy of traditional societies, enterprise anthropology)
Cultural anthropology and symbol anthropology
Symbolic aspects (art and creativity, gesture symbols, visual aspects, magic and beliefs, philosophy and religion)
Customs and rituals (Growth and social games, words and communication, rites, customs)
Body (medical anthropology, body techniques)
Cognition and mind (education, perception, categorization, theories of the mind)
Disasters and existential problems in the field of helping professions (Philosophical Anthropology, Existential Clinical Anthropology, Counseling, Philosophical Consulting).
Social models and classifications (culture, ethnicity, identity, roles, cultural exchanges, social networks, hierarchy, genders)
Anthropology of religions (in historical and comparative perspectives, in the definition of religion and in the magical and supernatural aspects)
In addition, the disciplines of ethno-linguistics, which deals with the linguistic variations of different human societies, and archaeology and palethnology, which investigate societies of the past through the material remains that they have left ("material culture").
Albera D., Blok A., Bomberger C., Anthropology of the Mediterranean, Guerini, Milan, 2007.
Angioni G., Fare, dire, sentere: l'identico e il diverso nelle culture, Il Maestrale, Torino, 2011.
Fabetti U., Storia dell'anthropologia, Zanichelli, Bologna, 2011 (third ed.).
Fabetti U., Malighetti R., Matera V., From tribal to global. Introduction to anthropology, Bruno Mondadori, Milan 2012.
Fabetti U., Matera V., Ethnography, scriptures and representations of anthropology, Carocci, Rome, 1997.
Fabetti U., Remotti F. (ed.), Dictionary of Anthropology. Ethnology, cultural anthropology, social anthropology, Zanichelli, Bologna, 1997.
Geertz C., Interpretation of cultures, Il Mulino, Bologna, 1998.
Geertz C., Global World, Local Worlds Culture and Politics at the end of the 20th century, Il Mulino, Bologna, 1999.
Lombo J. A., Russo F., Philosophical Anthropology. An introduction, Edusc, Rome, 2007.
Mead M., Baldwin J., Race Debate, Rizzoli, Milan, 1973.
Moravia S., Lévi-Strauss and structural anthropology, Sansoni, Florence, 1973.
Martone A., Ecity, Technical Anthropology, Rubbettino, Catanzaro 2018.
Anthropological Site in mediawiki entirely dedicated to ethno-anthropological disciplines.
Anthropological Yearbook - Annunario Anthropologico Italiano, a project dedicated to the census of anthropologists working in Italy and Italian anthropologists working abroad
Istituto Italiano di Anthropologia - information on scientific meetings, research activities and downloadable scientific articles concerning evolutionary anthropology and interdisciplinary approaches
Italian Digital Archive for Anthropology - A project to digitize publications, documents and materials of historical and scientific interest
Antrocom Onlus - Non-profit association for dissemination and research in the field of physical anthropology and cultural anthropology
Agriculture (from Latin agriculture, ager fields, and culture cultivation) is the human activity that consists in the cultivation of plant species. The basic aim of agriculture is to obtain products from plants, to be used mainly for food purposes. In economics, agriculture falls within the primary sector.
Traditionally it is popularly referred to the production of plant resources for food purposes both directly and indirectly through animal production in livestock farming. For scientific and legal purposes, however, both materials are commonly combined, which covers the cultivation of plants (arboreal and herbaceous), the breeding of animals and the exploitation of forests. The definition at the bureaucratic level can also include other activities derived from other productive sectors depending on the policies implemented in the different countries in various periods: as a partial example, in Italy, over the years have added to the agricultural sector forestation, floriculturalism, agriturismo, educational farms and dog breeding.
Although very often linked to local conventions and customs, the patrons universally recognized for agriculture in the Catholic world are: San Martino di Tours (whose anniversary falls on November 11, the day of the beginning of the agrarian year), Sant'Antonio Abate, Sant'Isidoro farmer, San Leonardo di Noblac Abate, San Biagio and San Benedetto da Norcia.
The history and evolution of agriculture go hand in hand with human technological development and the development of knowledge or techniques of cultivation. In general, in the history of agriculture, we move progressively, through various stages, from subsistence farming, to extensive agriculture based on broad-floor farming and crop rotation to intensive and specialised agriculture, increasingly mechanized, with the use of fertilizers and genetic engineering techniques and with the aim of marketing on the relevant agricultural market, although these types of cultivation continue to coexist in different parts of the world, linked to the level of economic development of the respective country of interest.
In the Paleolithic the men were hunters-gatherers and fed with the resources that nature offered them spontaneously and hunting the animals. Towards the BC, at the end of the last glaciation, some human group began to produce in a stable and continuous form the food that before found or hunted in abundance: agriculture was born. The first to be cultivated were the water-rich lands of the river basins, such as the Nile and the area between the river Tigris and Euphrates, lands that were periodically flooded by the floods of the great rivers leaving the clean, leveled, soft and fertilized soils from the silt, therefore ready to be simply sown, in which cereals of various types sprouted.
Data from molecular and archaeological research generated over the last fifteen years indicate that agriculture has started independently in different areas of the world and that it includes a wide range of taxa. At least eleven regions of the Old and New World have been involved as independent centres of origin, including geographically isolated regions on most continents, but many more have been suggested. The first development is dated about years ago, separately in the fertile Crescent and the Chogha Golan in modern Iran, where wild barley, wheat and lentils have been cultivated and where the domestic forms of wheat have appeared around 9800 BC.
Agriculture would therefore have evolved some years ago through domestication.
Although there are examples of permanent settlements even before the beginning of the cultivations, it was the introduction of agriculture that led to the development of sedentary communities of ever larger size, progressively structured in villages and cities. The economy of Egypt was based on agriculture and was among the first populations to use the plow in wood and the hoe; especially in the basin of the Middle East and the Mediterranean, man, abandoned the nomadic life to settle permanently in a single territory, began to domesticate the animals. The breeding ensured availability of meat and milk, as well as raw materials such as wool and skins, and, until the invention of the combustion engines, was the most important working force as aid in the ploughing and fertilization of the land.
Analysis of skeletal findings shows that farmers, unlike hunters-gatherers, suffered much more from health, were anemic, with cary teeth, six centimeters lower, had to work more and had less variety of foods; on the other hand they had more children.
The relationship between the property of the land and the social role soon became fundamental. In the classical and Latin world, the agricultural system was based on the division of the land according to the need of the city and sullager publicus, as well as in the biennial rotation, where, in autumn, about half of the land was sown with cereals and the other half was left to rest (maggese). The second year the two portions were reversed.
In addition to the nomadic type breeding practiced for millennia by entire populations, there is also a nomadic type cultivation that persists among some populations living in tropical environments that is called cutting and burning technique, consisting in the deforestation of a wooded area and subsequent burning and sowing in the burnt ground, which, exhausted fertility, is changed from year to year. An ancient tradition subsequently disappeared of nomadic agriculture in continental environments is attested in Russia, where it was called obščina.
During the Middle Ages new plants came to Europe brought by Arabs: rice, cotton, carob, pistachio, spinach, citrus. After the discovery of America came corn, potato, pumpkin, bean, peanut, tomato, pepper, papaya and sunflower.
The agriculture based on three-year rotation and on the Maggese remained predominant until the seventeenth century.
In particular, in Flanders and Brabant the soil was not fertile, but the remarkable development of maritime trade greatly increased the demand for products such as linen for canvas, colours for cloth, barley and hops for beer, hemp for ropes, tobacco, etc. The population density also favoured the development of horticulture and fruit growing. New techniques were therefore adopted based on the multi-year rotation and the replacement of the pasture with pastures for livestock, also to obtain natural manure.
These innovations were studied by European and American experts. British agronomist Richard Weston visited the Flemish provinces around 1650 and described in his famous work, A discourse of husbandrie used in Brabant and Flanders, their method based on crop rotation (lin, turnip, oats, clover). The new methods gave origin to the Norfolk system, generally considered the prototype of a new agriculture that, thanks to the rotation and other aspects (fecinations, large companies, long leases, metal plough pulled by horses, etc.), allowed England to export large quantities of wheat and flour in the period 1700-1770. According to Paul Bairoch, the remarkable development of agriculture stimulated the subsequent industrial revolution thanks to the demand for ploughs and other metal tools.
Other countries followed the example of England. For example, in France, in which medieval agricultural techniques dominated until 1750, François Quesnay's physiocratic school expressly proposed since 1756 (date of the article Rentals Quesnay wrote for the Encyclopédie) the adoption of the English model.
The industrial revolution called to itself from the countryside many laborers who poured to other continents and/or to the big cities. In Italy the migration was from the south towards the triangle Piemonte/Veneto/Emilia and to counter it were planned government plans that reclamation plans of the governmental lands that were destined for agriculture.
During the nineteenth century, the best tools and systems of sowing, acquisition of new seeds and new plants with high productivity (mais), the appearance of agricultural machinery and chemical fertilizers, carried out a deep rural restructuring that still stimulated the construction of new equipment and machines for all agricultural needs. Agricultural activity soon became industrial in the economically advantageous countries, while in Eastern Europe, South America, Asia and Africa remained large uncultivated land, although cultivable.
Over the centuries, agriculture has always had primary importance for the development of peoples and empires; in the 21st century it is often deserving of superficial attention in modern economies, while it remains a primary source of subsistence and a cornerstone of the economic development of the poorest and most backward countries. The importance of this practice is demonstrated by the fact that it is to all intents and purposes a science and that it is now on the border with many other sciences such as genetics and biology, both animal and plant.
The governments of the industrialized countries between 1960 and the end of the 1990s led to the so-called green revolution, i.e. they invested heavily in agricultural research, directly in the fields of farmers, seeking other systems to increase food production by developing pesticides and fertilizers, encouraging them to use these new technologies and revolutionizing agricultural practices, with the abandonment of traditional ones.
Modern agriculture is increasingly based on the introduction of energy outside the system in the form of plant protection products, mechanization, fertilizers, genetic engineering and technology; we are therefore talking about intensive agriculture, as opposed to extensive agriculture.
Without prejudice to the negative implications of an intensive farming practice, the continuous growth of world food needs, the need to keep food prices low, the reduction of arable land, the need to grow even in areas which are clearly unfavourable (sometimes also due to pollution) and to be able to obtain high nutritional quality products, the operators face a limited number of choices.
The traditional practices used before the green revolution had the defect of not being able to supply products in large quantities and economic, attractive for consumers, but above all consistent with the quality and safety standards imposed by law and suitable for the processes of industrial transformation. Part of this traditional agriculture takes the name of organic agriculture, which nevertheless constitutes a market niche of some relevance and presents medium-high prices.
On the other hand, intensive agriculture presents clear sustainability problems and for this year-to-year reason the need for sector technology is growing more and more attentive to environmental problems.
Among the technological solutions, there has been the adoption of integrated control approaches, on the other hand the improvement of chemical compounds (less toxic and persistent) and the varieties used. In this perspective also the O.G.M. are located.
Although mechanization has an Anglo-Saxon mold, the very first agricultural machines of the seventeenth century, are the result of Italian ingenuity:
Giuseppe Locatelli built the first simple sower, composed of a drawer containing the seeds applied to the plow. Proceeding, the plow rotates a spoon dispenser inserted in the drawer and the seed fell to the ground.
Giovanni Cavallina built the first mechanical seeding machine, which, with a system of hole shelves and small tubes, laid the seeds in the grooves just drawn by the plough.
In the 19th century Lambruschini and the Ridolfi brothers built a helical overturner to shred the larger plates.
The first mechanical driving force was the steam machine, which was used to operate cereal threshing machines and hay and straw presses.
In the United States the first tractor was built, the engine machine par excellence. They were, however, very heavy and difficult to handle. After twenty years of testing, the Ford industries provided American farmers with lighter tractors, easier to repair, simple in maintenance, at affordable prices.
In 1930, the Landini industries built the first tractor with a hot head engine, well used in large reclamation and unbundling works.
The natural factors of plant production are as follows:
Intrinsic biological-mutrophical factors: such are the genetic bases that influence the anatomy, morphology (biology) and physiology of the individual agricultural species and the specific characteristics of their products.
Extrinsic biological factors: these are the ecological relationships that are established between agricultural species and other living organisms (plants, animals, micro-organisms) that populate the natural ecosystem, with interactions of competition, predation, parasitism, symbiosis, neutrality, etc.
Climate factors: these are phenomena due to the interaction of the atmosphere and the sun with the earth's surface in its various components (litosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere). The main climatic factors that affect plant production are solar radiation, temperature, precipitation or hydrometeor, wind, atmospheric humidity, evapotranspiration, the chemical composition of air. Of less direct relevance is atmospheric pressure.
Pedological factors: these are phenomena due to the interaction of the soil with the hydrosphere, the atmosphere, the sun, the hydrosphere and the biosphere. The soil is a complex environment, derived from the pedogenesis, generated by the balance between the lithosphere and the other elements interacting on the earth's surface. The physical properties of the soil, the chemical properties, the biological properties, which together contribute to determining its fertility, are pedological factors.
Unlike the simple collection of natural products of the earth, agriculture is a technique that intervenes by modifying the natural factors of plant production in order to increase, in quality and quantity, the product. The harvest, in fact, exploits the natural production entirely subordinate to the specific needs of the plants and to the dynamics of the ecosystem without any intervention of the man. Agriculture instead provides the intervention of man in correcting, in his favor, the intrinsic and extrinsic conditions that determine the plant production.
The interventions of the man that contribute to delineating an agricultural activity, distinguishing it from that of simple harvest, are for example the following:
Interventions on intrinsic biological factors are such as selection, genetic improvement, biotechnology, hybridization, pruning, grafting and plantation density. Overall, these interventions contribute to directing the natural productive trend of individual agricultural species towards specific human needs.
Interventions on extrinsic biological factors are such as weeding, phytoiatrics and the defense of plants in the broad sense, which aim to contain phenomena of biological antagonism, others such as the association or more or less advanced forms of biotechnology (michorization, bacterization and other forms of inoculation of symbiont organisms), aim to promote phenomena of biological synergy. Others, like crop rotation, have a complex role in determining the balance between antagonisms and synergies.
Climate factors interventions: such are, for example, protective preparations aimed at reducing the negative influence of the climate or enhancing the positive influence of the climate to drastically correct one or more factors. Climate factors include the setting-up of windbreaks, cold protection works (house, tunnel, mulching, etc.), irrigation. Less obvious is the role played by other agricultural practices as they are forms of adaptation to existing climatic conditions: such are the choice of the sowing age, the transplant, the varietal choice, the plantation density, the orientation of the rows, some working of the soil, etc.
Interventions on pedological factors: these are the most complex because they are actions that can modify different properties of the soil at the same time. They are such the workings of the soil and the finement, which mainly influence (but not only) the physical properties, the fertilization, which mainly influences the chemical properties but also has a non-secondary role on the physical and biological ones, the irrigation, which influences the physical, chemical and biological properties, etc.
Agronomy is an applied science that studies the role of individual factors of plant production and mutual interactions, elaborates agricultural techniques with the coordination of factors at different levels, in order to optimize production for economic purposes. For agronomy and agriculture are sometimes used as synonyms, however, strictly agronomy is an applied science linked to other sciences (biology, chemistry, physics, geology, etc.), whose main field of application is agriculture. Agriculture is instead a set of techniques that summarize the empirical knowledge handed down from generation to generation in a thousand year old practice and those technical ones provided by scientific research in the agronomic field. The various forms of agriculture derive from the weight role they have, on the one hand, the agronomy and, on the other hand, the tradition.
During the 66th session of the United Nations General Assembly, 2014 was formally declared International Year of Family Agriculture (IYFF).
FAO has been invited to facilitate its implementation, in cooperation with governments, international development agencies, farmers' organisations and other organisations relevant to the United Nations system, as well as non-governmental organisations.
The aim of the international year is to reposition family farming at the heart of the agricultural, environmental and social policies of national agendas in order to identify gaps and opportunities and to promote fairer and more balanced development.
The international year of family farming aims to promote debate and cooperation at national, regional and global level with the aim of better identifying the challenges faced by farmers in order to be able to effectively support both them and their families.
Many artists, especially in the 19th century, coinciding with the triumph of Impressionism and painting en plein air, chose the life of the fields as the object of their works.
The one who dominates all the others for the ability to tell the fatigue of the poor people and to give a humble and religious sense to that effort is Vincent van Gogh, the visionary painter who died of suicide when he was just 37 years old. At Arles, in the south of France, he fell in love with the colors of the Provençal campaign. He went out of the house at dawn, reached the fields, and painted until evening, the picture "The harvest" came out. He had adopted the same times and subjected himself to the same effort as the peasants and at the end of the day he took the fruits: a picture full of incredible and joyful colors. In the last period of his life, the fields turned into dark omens of misfortune.
In Auvers-sur-Oise, around Paris, he painted increasingly dark images. His last subject was a field of wheat flew over by a flock of crows. In that field, a few days later, he shot himself with a revolver at his side.
Bairoch P., Industrial Revolution and Underdevelopment, Einaudi, Turin, 1967
Daclon C.M., Agriculture and World Reforms, in Agriculture, Journal of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, n. 300, 2000
Daclon C.M., Biotechnology and Agriculture, in Agriculture, Journal of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, n. 302, 2000
Monbiot G., The future is underground. An investigation to feed the world without devouring the planet, Mondadori, 2022
Saltini A., History of Agricultural Sciences, 4 volumes, Bologna 1984-89, ISBN 88-206-2412-5, ISBN 88-206-241-3, ISBN 88-206-2414-1, ISBN 88-206-2415-X
Saltini A. Processe all'agricoltura, Preface by Giovanni Marcora, Bologna, 1979
Sereni E.History of the Italian agricultural landscape Laterza, 1989
Slicher van Bath Bernard H., Agrarian History of Western Europe (500-1850), Einaudi, Turin, 1972 (Italian translation from the English edition The Agrarian History of Western Europe, A. D. 500 - 1850, E. Arnold, London, 1963, edited by the same author; original edition: De agrariansche geschiedenis van West-Europa (500-1850), Het Spectrum, Utrecht-Antwerpen, 1962)
Vignoli G., Legal profiles of agricultural production, Giuffrè, Milan, 1991.
Vignoli G. Legal aspects of genetic activities in agriculture, Giuffrè, Milan, 1986.
Vignoli G. I territori italofoni non partecipanti alla Repubblica Italiana "agraristica", Giuffrè, Milano, 1995.
Council for Research and Experimentation in Agriculture
Architecture is the discipline that aims at the organization of the anthropized space in which the human being lives. Simplifying it can be said that it mainly concerns the design and construction of a building or of the built environment. In it, technical and artistic aspects compete. Together with sculpture, it is part of the so-called plastic visual arts.
Since man's cognitive abilities were such that he could organize himself in civilizations, architecture has always existed. Architecture was born first of all to satisfy the biological needs of man such as protection from atmospheric agents, and for this reason it is among the disciplines most present in all civilizations. Only at a later moment, with the development of the division of labour in society, secondary functions in increasing numbers were added to the primary function.
With the appearance of aesthetic characters, architecture was born also as visual art, but it has its own peculiar characteristics. It would also be reductive to talk about aesthetic values as a good architecture is often the result of ethical values and an anthropological study.
Defining architecture is difficult because the architectural phenomenon has always been present in the culture of man, acquiring characteristics, definitions, functions, spatial and constructive aspects often different or even conflicting from civilization to civilization or from epoch to epoch.
"Architecture" comes from an architect, a term derived in the western languages from the Latin architectus, but of Greek origin: (architektōn pronunciation), a word composed of the terms "ρχή (árche) and τέκτων (técton) meaning "engineer," "builder leader," "first artifact" or "architect."
The first term, connected with "ρχτν (árchein), "primarily" or "chief" is expressed in ancient Greek, expressing the meaning of "enterprise," "departure," "origin," "foundation" or "guide." Introduced by Anassimandro, "ρχή" finds in the Metaphysics of Aristotle (V, 1, 1012b-1013a) its first complete definition, preserved until modernity. Aristotle distinguishes at least six meanings of the term, attributable to the two main meanings of "ρχή," i.e. first in importance or first in temporal order. When value primacy and temporal primacy coincide, "ρχή" expresses the divinity: God as the highest value and cause before all things.
The second term, τέκτης (técton), recalls several meanings, among which "invent", "create", "plasm" and "build": technical work but also art, manual work but also handicraft.
The union of the two terms in the "Pfxιτέκτης" we find it for the first time by Herodotus, Stories (III, 60, 4), and wants to indicate who will give rational norm to the construction of anything. The reference to the building or the dwelling is not at all explicit; indeed, the "Pfxιτέκτης" originally deals with what is "constructable" in general. This interpretation is sanctioned by Vitruvius, who defines architecture as activity that "nascitur ex fabrica et ratiocinatione," that is, from the building capacity combined with theoretical awareness.
Another interesting aspect is the phonetic permanence and the literal resemblance and the graphic resemblance that the term has preserved in many European languages: architecture in French, architecture in English, arquitectura in Spanish, architektur in German (which adds the term baukunst that literally means "art of building").
The first true treatise of architecture is the De architectura by Vitruvio, in which a first definition of discipline is given and the figure of the architect and his knowledge is outlined. The De architectura will particularly influence architecture from the 15th century to the 19th century.
In the Middle Ages architecture is assimilated to the mechanic artes by philosophers such as Scoto Eurigenia and Ugo di San Vittore. During the Romanesque and Gothic periods the figure more similar to that of the architect, was that of the foreman, a Magister operis who after years of experience took care of the design of the building and the progress of the construction site.
While in the rest of Europe the Gothic will remain the predominant style for a long time, in Italy the Renaissance places architecture under a new light. One of the fundamental treatises was the De re aedificatoria of Leon Battista Alberti who refers to the Vitruvian triad (firmitas, utilitas, venustas). In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the concept of ideal city developed, for the first time architecture is interested in the city and the correct disposition of its elements. It was during humanism instead the passage of the architect as an artist-artisan to that of a universal scientist artist. Particularly important was the figure of the Vignola who helped create a uniform lexicon of architecture through the cataloging of classical architectural orders.
Renaissance anthropocentrism is replaced by an investigation aimed at the synthesis of the contrast between infinity and centrality. Thanks also to technical and mathematical discoveries, architectural conceptions based on the rediscovery of nature as a scenic element, on dynamism and movement are generated. Classic patterns are modified by the insertion of curved lines and solutions are adopted that open the door to modernity.
During the 18th century there was the birth of the concept of aesthetics and a great reflection on this term by the philosophers and historians of the time (Giambattista Vico, Immanuel Kant). Carlo Lodoli and Giovanni Battista Piranesi theorized first an architecture without ornaments, without concessions to the ephemeral visual pleasure and that kept in utmost consideration the utility and the functional purpose. Also thanks to the Industrial Revolution, the architects are called to design the objects to be realized in series, is the case of the Etruria manufacture of Josiah Wedgwood, the first case of industrial design modernly understood.
It is during the nineteenth century that the definitive division of the profession of engineer from that of the architect takes place; in addition while some engineering faculties will be formed in Europe in the universities, architecture will be confined in the academies of fine arts, remaining in some cases a mere artistic exercise, far from practical and functional issues. In the United States of America instead the Chicago school develops, where architecture will be confronted with very high buildings and with a new material: reinforced concrete. In France, thanks to the contribution of Viollet-Le-Duc, the restoration and an intense debate around this discipline will also involve England first (John Ruskin and William Morris) and then Italy (Camillo Boito and Luca Beltrami).
The twentieth century and Rationalism
A series of factors, including Art Nouveau's infuhlung theory and the pure visibility of Konrad Fiedler, the question of popular housing born from World War I, the conflicts between the social classes, will lead to the birth in architecture of that design and theoretical movement called rationalism.
The architecture will take over a whole series of disciplines in order to allow the architect to arrive to design from the smallest objects to the larger ones; it will tend to eliminate any artistic desire from the concept of architecture in favor of works more oriented to the utility and service of the people. Among the great theorists and supporters of this movement were Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Frank Lloyd Wright. Among the other great masters of the twentieth century are mentioned Alvar Aalto, Oscar Niemeyer and Kenzō Tange.
In Italy great importance has had the futurist experience of Antonio Sant'Elia and Mario Chiattone. Always in Italy it is worth remembering Marcello Piacentini, Pier Luigi Nervi, Ludovico Quaroni, Michele Valori, Bruno Zevi, Aldo Rossi.
Given the vastness and complexity of the discipline, it is almost impossible to give a unique definition describing what architecture is; below are some famous and significant ones.
The knowledge of the architect is rich in the contributions of numerous disciplinary fields and knowledge related to various fields, and to his judgment are submitted the results produced by other techniques. Vitruvio, De architectura, about 25 BC;
Architect I will call him, who will know with certainty, and wonderful reason, and rules, yes with the mind, and with the soul to divide; yes with the work bring to an end all those things, which by means of movements of weights, joinings, and massages of bodies, can be with great dignity accommodate well to the use of the homini. Leon Baptist Alberti, De re aedificatoria, about 1450;
What is architecture? I will define it, with Vitruvius, the art of building? Certainly No. There is, in this definition, a gross error. Vitruvius takes the effect for the cause. The conception of the work precedes its execution. - Étienne-Louis Boullée, 1780;
Architecture is the art of manufacturing. - Francesco Milizia, Principii di architettura civile, 1781;
Architecture is the art of disposing and adorning buildings, erected by man for any purpose, so that their simple sight can contribute to health, strength, and enjoyment of the spirit. - John Ruskin, Lectures on Architecture and Painting, 1854;
My concept of architecture embraces the entire environment of human life; we cannot escape architecture, as long as we are part of civilization, for it represents the whole of the changes and alterations made on the earth's surface, in view of human needs, except the pure desert - William Morris, Prospects of Architecture in Civilization, 1881;
The house must please everyone. Unlike the work of art that does not need to please anyone. [...] Therefore the house would have nothing to do with art and architecture would not be counted among the arts: just like that. [...] If in a wood we find a six-foot long and three-foot long mound, arranged with the pyramid-shaped shovel, we do serious and something says within us: here a man is buried. This is Architecture - Adolf Loos, Words in the void, 1910;
Architecture is the skillful, rigorous and magnificent game of volumes in light - Le Corbusier, Verso una architettura, 1923;
Constructive clarity brought to its exact expression. This is what I call architecture - Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, 1925.
Architecture is somehow an order of the environment around us, a better opportunity for human settlement. - Vittorio Gregotti, Il territorio dell'architettura, 1966;
Architecture is the oldest profession on earth, the art of building, but also the art of representing things. - Renzo Piano, 2007
Architecture comes from the civilization of a people, from an equipped industry, from serious and select schools, from the education of the people, from the honesty of the enterprises, from good simple sensible legislation and from a minimum of faith in the future. - Michele Valori
One of the oldest definitions goes back to Marco Vitruvio Pollione, architecture is a set of three factors or three categories:
In other words, in architecture, quality must be found:
Without stability architecture is dangerous and ephemeral; without usefulness the fine architecture in itself is simply a large-scale sculpture; without beauty (as Ruskin, Le Corbusier and Pevsner point out) we talk only about building.
In each building these three aspects are of vital importance, even if during the historical epochs they did not always have the same weight. Think, for example, of the architecture of the so-called Modern Movement: the aesthetic factor understood as mere decoration was deliberately neglected in the design, focused only on the function of the buildings; from the essential simplicity however it emerged a natural aesthetic value.
An evolution of this first definition was, for example, given in 1624 by Sir Henry Wotton, who in his Elements of Architecture spoke of three imperatives of architectural work: robustness, functionality and pleasure, that is, solidity of materials and construction (=stability), rational adaptation of spaces to their purposes (= utility) and production of aesthetic pleasure (= beauty).
These three factors can be put on a hypothetical hierarchical scale: a building needs first to stand, then it can occupy a function for society, finally it can be built according to aesthetic criteria; but attention to beauty cannot come before the attribution of a destination, nor any use or decoration can be put into effect if structural stability is lacking.
Architecture and stability: the static
In order to ensure stability in a building, we must use the notions of static and building science, that is, those principles of physics, chemistry and mechanics that ensure the balance of construction, that is, standing and not falling.
The forces that act on a construction are multiple: first the proper weight of the structure, the accidental loads (people, furnishings, goods deposited...); then there are the external forces, due to the atmospheric agents (wind, weight of snow), to ordinary events (oscillations of the road traffic, push of the water course on a bridge) or extraordinary (sysms, storms) or to other.
Although loads can be numerous and the structure very complex, the buildings are stressed by only two types of action: traction and compression.
Being each force compensated by another of equal size but of opposite direction, the equilibrium condition is achieved when the sum of all forces and their moments is zero.
Architecture and utility: architectural work or sculptural work?
According to critic Bruno Zevi, the distinctive criterion of architecture is the interior space: the presence or not of a habitable and usable environment for man was the codice sine qua non one could not speak of architecture; all the rest was in function of this assumption. The consequences of this statement are that buildings made without internal space (or with an irrelevant space) would not be architecture: Zevi indicated as a clear example the Pyramids of Giza, huge "sculptures" outdoors, but not architecture; neither was the Greek temple architecture, since its limited cell was destined to the symbolic dwelling of the god and not to the use of individuals, who carried out the religious ceremonies outside.
Walter Gropius basically agreed with this definition, although he adapted it in a more abstract sense: for him architecture was the art of organizing space and expressing itself through the construction of buildings.
Zevi's definition is logical, but it is very rigid and excludes many works traditionally considered "architectonic" from the field of investigation of architecture.
Its overcoming can also be considered the structure and construction of a work: when a building is walled according to the criteria of the building, even if it does not have an internal space, here we can still talk about a building, not of sculpture. It is clear therefore in our way of thinking that a sculpture is born from the "sculpting" (i.e. from removing) and a building from the "wall" (i.e. from putting): here is that Monte Rushmore, however colossal, is considered intuitively sculpture and the Pyramids, even if they are lacking in any internal environment, architecture.
A middle way between the two conceptions is instead to look at the function of the "constructed" structures that we define buildings: thanks to the usefulness (both to welcome the body of a pharaoh, the spirit of a god or a community in prayer) we can talk about architecture, otherwise we are simply talking about sculpture on a large scale. Thus architecture includes also "open" structures such as bridges or amphitheatres.
Architecture and beauty: architectural work or construction work?
Construction can generally be defined as the construction of buildings for practical purposes (defying from atmospheric agents): the aesthetic component is not necessarily included, i.e. it is not required that they be given to the building known as "beauty."
Until a few centuries ago the discriminating was the presence or not of a theoretical project upstream, of a design. In the 21st century this distinction was a bit complicated because in the modern world those forms of spontaneous construction without project have disappeared and the use of the design is necessary also in works of simple construction. It can be said that to speak of "aesthetics" of an architectural work there must be an idea, a formal concept, which is added to the structural and functional considerations, and is explicit in the form of the architectural work (in this sense there can also exist spontaneous architecture). In other words, it needs to be an element of "gratuity" understood in the Greek sense of the term (of beauty, grace, and gratuitousness as we understand it), that is a search for beauty without conditioning. Thus, the will of expression of the architect determined by his aesthetic and artistic feeling is expressed.
In fact, there is also a separation between the one who deals mainly (but not only) with structural technical aspects, the engineer, and the one who devotes himself more generally to aesthetic aspects, the architect (even if in the 21st century the two fields now have very labile borders).
Among the three basic elements of architecture, the visual one, in a spatial and monumental sense, is the one that impresses us most. Structural qualities (that is, how the building faces standing) are in fact often hidden or fully understandable only by experts in the sector; functional qualities are often given for granted or obvious and although they can positively impress us cannot hit us as deeply as monumentality. For example, you can be impressed by the comfort of a railway station or by the welcome of a church, but it is easier for us to remain carved in memory the feeling of beauty and majesty of the buildings themselves.
Pevsner himself identifies three elements that contribute to the achievement of an aesthetic effect:
the treatment of surfaces, the relationships between solids and voids, the arrangement of openings and the presence of a decorative apparatus;
the relationship between the different blocks constituting a building and its volumetric articulation;
the sensory effect that comes from the treatment of the interiors and the arrangement of the various environments.
The architecture is therefore configured as a spatial art, capable of shaping surfaces and volumes with the same criteria of perception and visual communication as painters and sculptors, which is not reduced to the visual component alone, but which is also linked to the sensations that living a space (as well as seeing it) manages to transmit.
Among the building factors of architecture is the evaluation of the built volume, that is, the way buildings are arranged and related in space. There are two extremes, among which there is a wide range of possibilities:
architectures according to volume only.
architectures according to space only.
Space means an "artificial" space created by the construction, which is finished, ordered and protected, unlike open natural space.
An example of volume-only architecture is a pure form such as that of the Pyramids, whose structure is dictated by the attainment of an external form and is almost completely disinterested in the interior space. An opposite case of architecture erected from space may be that of a Christian basilica, in which the external construction can be seen as a simple envelope determined by the inner space. An example of intermediate interpenetration may be that of the Greek temple, where empty and full spaces are determined by precise relationships, with certain elements of independent volume, such as the columns, and others which would instead lose meaning if isolated from the context of the building to which they belong.
The study of the history of architecture is not only an exercise in identifying styles and techniques and their evolution over time. It is important to understand also what are the aims that a society compared to a building, the technical knowledge and materials available that have determined the construction. For example, one can list the objective differences between a Greek temple of antiquity and a church. In antiquity the religious functions took place outside the building: the cell was reserved for the symbolic residence of the god, here only a few priests entered, while in the church the community of the faithful gathered inside it, so it is clear that the building became a closed place where to practice religious rituals.
In the realization of an architectural work they have always competed both the demands of a client and the extro and the imagination of the artists. The lack of fact of fine buildings in themselves (when building is always there is at least one practical purpose for which the construction is intended) means that the aspect of convergence of the interests of artists and clients has remained a key concept, compared to other forms of artistic activity where the artist has now freed himself from the question.
The first examples of "architecture" as a union of stability, functionality and beauty are therefore not to be found in housing construction (in ancient times dictated only by basic needs of subsistence), but in the collective buildings (religious or civil) of those first civilizations such as the Mesopotamian or Egyptian one: in fact, all the efforts of a community, including the need for embellishment as a mirror of its prestige and richness, converged in such works.
An architecture instinctively devoted to beauty is already at the origin of civilization, but it is nevertheless with the Greek temple that most scholars agree to establish at least a firm point in the evolution of the art of building: an unmistakable first goal of architectural structure complete with design, aesthetic and functional values, supported by the theorization of architectural orders. The three types of order (doric, ionic and corinthian) are in fact related to purely aesthetic issues and their birth indicates that they no longer looked at the building only according to a functional point of view.
In the buildings finally, a whole series of values, with different degrees of intensity, have converged over time, which have influenced its history and form:
functional values, i.e. linked to certain needs of the individual and society;
symbolic values, related to realities of another order;
sacred values of the religious sphere;
social values, in relation to the characteristics and configuration of society;
other values (personal of the client or architect, universal values, etc.)
The aesthetic effect does not arise therefore from a mere visual impact: for example, in the architectures related to the Modern Movement, space is modeled on the basis of precise functional needs and therefore the achievement of an aesthetic result derives from the perfect fulfillment of a function.
Ultimately, the architecture, rather than the expression of the individual (the architect) is that of an environment, of an epoch, of a society: at most, considering the greater or lesser personal contribution of the architect compared to the general context, his "genius" will emerge with more or less strength.
In the high-tech architecture, which sees in the Centre Pompidou of Renzo Piano one of the paradigmatic works, are the technical and structural aspects that outline the canons of a new aesthetic, more open to technological innovations and that actually leads to a overcoming of the constant and harmful dichotomy between architects and engineers.
The architecture, unlike other artistic forms such as painting and sculpture, is not presented in a "complete" way to the viewer: for example, a painting is made to be seen standing in front of him, a sculpture may require to turn around, but of an architecture you can have only partial impressions of the whole: for example only the facade of the building, only one room at a time, only a view on the plan. Only with an intellectual effort can we evaluate the real set of an architectural complex.
On this aspect of "partial" experience of the observer sometimes some architects and artists have also played: think only of the example of the perspective gallery of Palazzo Spada in Rome, where Francesco Borromini deformed the architectural elements to give the idea of a great depth that does not actually exist.
Witelo, a 13th-century mathematician and physicist from Silesia, wrote that "The eye cannot understand the true form of things with mere gaze (aspectus), but yes with diligent intuition (obtudus) " . Lobtudus is therefore a penetrating, rational gaze, while laspectus is the simple outward vision: it goes without saying that only with the use of the first one can one understand an architectural work, while thespectus is sufficient for painting and much of the sculpture.
The perception of space is a complex aspect of human experience and cannot be reduced to the sense of sight. Admiring the photo of a building in a magazine and visiting the same building inserted in the environment are different experiences, incomparable. Still, more visits to the same building can give very different sensations, for example depending on the time of day and season. To grasp the richness of architecture it is necessary to experience it directly.
Another element of difficulty is represented by the constant evolution over the centuries of the forms of buildings, in relation to changing the needs of society. The large ancient buildings were not considered as "finite" works, like a painting or a statue, but were periodically modified and updated, acquiring a sort of evolutionary "life": some speak in this case of formability, understood as the dynamic process on several occasions of invention and production. For this reason, in front of a work of the past, more frequently before an architectural work, we must imagine to browse layers with "onion" of additions, tamperings and subtractions of different eras.
This difficulty of perception has as a consequence that it is difficult to have a "univocal" experience of architecture and the very concept of this art is difficult to frame in absolute terms, as evidenced also by the great variety of definitions that have happened over the centuries.
A correct perception of a building gives rise to an understanding of the architectural form. The architectural form is the summa of three substantial factors, organically combined and not in hierarchy:
The structures (the building elements)
Space (understood as the arrangement in the environment with full and empty volumes)
A perfect fusion of these three factors gives an architectural work as a "work of art." An example can be the Gothic pillars of a basilica like Saint Denis near Paris: the structure is composed of specially carved and superimposed stone cones; this structure gives life to a full space, that is to say to the volume of the pillar itself, which extends into the empty space of the nave; this volume has a three-dimensional design, which is not due only to decorative motifs, but each semi-colonine that faces it extends into precise architectural elements (arches, clergy, up to the ribs of the vaults), so it can be said that the three factors are inextricably linked.
The architecture, whose vastness derives also from the various fields to which it can be applied, is divided into different branches; beyond the design of the single building, there are in fact a series of interventions proper to the architecture that define the various disciplines in which it is articulated.
Architectural design is one of the main disciplines on which architecture is based. The project is the theoretical elaboration that precedes the realization of the architectural object, expressed in a number of graphics (sections, plants, perspectives, renders, etc.) and elaborated (metric compute, structural analysis, EIA, etc.). It is based on the indications provided by the client and on a series of investigations and studies carried out by the same architect also in consultation with other professional figures; such studies can be extremely varied and embrace multiple disciplines.
The architectural project can be exemplified in three main phases:
a preliminary description of the work to be carried out and the various constraints arising from the surveys carried out;
a definitive composition of the graphs useful to understand the work in all its parts and a series of reports related to the complete description of the area of intervention;
an executive consisting of all the graphs relating to the realization of the artifact, including details on an appropriate scale, and all feasibility studies as well as calculations relating to the structures and interventions.
Discipline that deals with the design of the interiors of residential and non residential buildings.
Architecture technology and technical architecture
They deal with the implementation issues, the study of the design and execution process, the quality of construction, the control of sustainability and the planning of maintenance, repair and demolition.
Science and technology of construction
It deals with the theory, practice and application of the mechanics of the structures (static and dynamic). This branch is related to the executive-structural design of any artifact and/or construction, particularly regarding the sizing, verification, construction types and constituent materials (which can be for example reinforced concrete, steel, wood and masonry) of the supporting structural elements.
These are measures relating to the construction, expansion or improvement of urban sectors.
It deals with the design of large spaces, be they urban or rural, based on cultural, environmental, historical and social characteristics of the territory.
The restoration is that discipline that deals with the direct interventions on cultural assets aimed at the conservation of the architectural object in order to enhance it, protecting its historical and cultural values, and allowing its reuse.
The restructuring is that discipline which deals with direct interventions on buildings aimed at conservation in order to enhance them and allow their reuse.
AA.VV., Encyclopedia dell'Architettura, Milano., Garzanti, 1996. ISBN 88-11-50465-1
Sergio Bollati and Giuseppe Lonetti, The Architectural Body, Florence, Alinea, 1990.
Giorgio Cricco e Francesco Di Teodoro, Itinerario nell'arte, Bologna, Zanichelli, 2003. ISBN 88-08-21740-X
W. Müller and G. Vogel, Atlas of Architecture, Milan, Hoepli, 1992. ISBN 88-203-1977-2
Pevsner, Fleming and Honour, Dictionary of Architecture, Turin, Utet, 1978 ISBN 88-06-51961-1; reprinted as Dictionary of Artistic Terms, Utet Tea, 1994.
Ludovico Quaroni, La costruzione del progetto architettura, Roma-Bari, Laterza, 1996.
Riccardo Salvi, Inside the building. Brief considerations on interior architecture, Milan, Franco Angeli, ISBN 978-88-917-4431-9
Bernard Tschumi e M. Berman, Index. Archivio dell'architettura contemporanea, Milano, postmedia books, 2004.
Lastronomy is the natural science that deals with the observation and explanation of the celestial events occurring in space. It studies the origins and evolution, the physical, chemical and temporal properties of the objects that form the universe and can be observed on the celestial sphere.
It is one of the oldest sciences and many archaic civilizations around the world have studied in a more or less systematic way the sky and astronomical events: Egyptians and Greeks in the Mediterranean area, Babylonians, Indians and Chinese in the East and finally the Maya and the incas in the Americas. These ancient astronomical studies were oriented towards the study of the positions of the stars (astrometria), the periodicity of events and cosmology and therefore, in particular for this last aspect, ancient astronomy is almost always strongly connected with religious aspects and divination aspects in past times considered important and strategic. In the twenty-first century, however, modern astronomical research is practically synonymous with astrophysics.
Astronomy should not be confused with astrology, a pseudoscience that claims that the apparent motions of the Sun and the planets in the zodiac influence human, personal and collective events in some way. Although the two disciplines have a common origin and for centuries they are totally different today: astronomers have embraced the scientific method since Galileo's time, unlike astrologers.
Astronomy is one of the few sciences in which the research work of amateur and amateur (astronomer) can play an important role, providing data on variable stars or discovering comets, nine, supernovae, asteroids or other objects.
Ethymologically, the word "astronomy" comes from the Latin astronom, which in turn comes from the Greek "στρονομία" ('astronomy' composed of "astronomy' astronomy' and "νόμος' nomos' "law', norm"). Most sciences use the Greek suffix λογία ('logy' treated, study'), as for example cosmology and biology. Indeed, "astronomy" could have taken the name of astrology, but this name was attributed to what is considered a pseudoscience, but in the beliefs of many peoples it was intended to predict the future through the study of heaven. Although they both share a common origin, they are very different: while astronomy is a science that applies the scientific method, modern astrology is a pseudoscience that follows a system of unproved beliefs.
Use of the terms "astronomy" and "astrophysics"
Generally, the terms "astronomy" or "astrophysics" can be used to refer to the same subject. According to the definitions of the dictionary, the term "astronomy" refers to the "study of matter and objects outside the Earth's atmosphere and their physical and chemical properties" while the "astrophysics" refers to the branch of astronomy that deals with "the behavior, physical properties and dynamic processes of celestial objects and other phenomena." In some cases, as in the introduction to the treatise The Physics Universe (The Physical Universe) of Frank Shu, it is said that "astronomy" can be used to describe the qualitative study of the subject, where the "astrophysics" is used to describe the physics-oriented version. However, since the most modern astronomical research treats subjects related to physics, modern astronomy could be called astrophysics. Various departments that do research on this subject can use "astronomy" and "astrophycics" according to the most modern astronomical and scientific department are associated with many of the department, astronomy.
At the beginning of its history, astronomy dealt solely with the observation and prediction of the movements of celestial objects that could be observed to the naked eye by man and their origin. In some places, the first civilizations built huge artifacts that probably had astronomical purposes, as well as being used for ceremonial purposes. These observers could have been used to determine the seasons, an indispensable factor for the organization of social and agricultural life, as well as for the understanding of the length of the year.
Before the invention of the telescope, the first studies on the stars were conducted with the naked eye, as did the civilizations that lived in Mesopotamia, Greece, Persia, India, China, Egypt and Central America, which built astronomical observers starting to explore the nature of the universe. Actually the astronomy of those times consisted mainly in mapping the position of stars and planets, science that is called astrometry. From these observations the first theories were formed on the movements of the planets and on the nature of the Sun, the Moon and the Earth, which was initially thought to be at the center of the universe. This conception of the universe was known as the geocentric system, or Ptolemaic system, named after the Greek astronomer Claudio Tolomeo.
Of particular importance was the application to the astronomy of mathematics, which began with the Babylonians, who founded the bases for traditions subsequently taken from other civilizations, discovering among other things that lunar eclipses recur according to a repetitive cycle known as saros, while Egyptian astronomy owes the perfection of the calendar.
After the Babylonians, significant astronomical advances occurred in Greece and in the Hellenistic world, with Greek astronomy seeking a rational physical explanation for celestial phenomena. In the 3rd century BC, Samos Aristarchus estimated the size and distance of the Moon and Sun, and was the first to propose a heliocentric model of the solar system, while in the 2nd century BC, Hipparchus discovered the precession of the equinoxes, calculated the size and distance of the Moon and invented one of the first astronomical instruments, the astrolabe. Hipparchus also created a complete catalogue of 1020 stars, and most of the constellations of the Northern Hemisphere were defined by the Greek astronomy. Anticythera's machine (c. 150-80 BC) was a mechanical calculator designed to know the position of the Sun, the Moon and the planets at a given date. Manufacts of such complexity will not be seen again in the 14th century when mechanicals appear in Europe.
Astronomy, mostly stagnant in medieval Europe, flourished in the Islamic world and in other places, leading to the birth of the first astronomical observers among Muslim peoples, beginning in the 9th century.
In 964, the Persian astronomer Azophi first described the Galaxy of Andromeda, the largest galaxy of the Local Group, in his Book of Fixed Stars. The supernova SN 1006, the brightest star object in history, was studied by the Egyptian astronomer Ali ibn Ridwan and by Chinese astronomers in 1006. Some Islamic astronomers who made a significant contribution to astronomy were Al-Battani, Thebit, Azophi, Albumasar, Biruni, Arzachel, Al-Birjandi, and the astronomers of the observers of Maragheh and Samarkanda. The astronomers of that period gave many traditional Arab names to the stars, still in use; it is believed that the ruins of Great Zimbabwe and Timbuctù may have hosted an astronomical observatory. Until recently in Europe it was thought that there had been no astronomical observation in the precolonial era in sub-Saharan Africa.
The Roman Catholic Church gave financial and social support for the study of astronomy for over six centuries, with the main motivation to find the date of Easter.
During the Renaissance began the turning point known as an astronomical revolution, beginning with the work of Niccolò Copernico, a supporter of the heliocentric system, although he was not the first to propose a model with the center of the Sun, but certainly the first to scientifically argue his theory. His work was defended, developed and corrected by Galileo Galilei and Kepler. The latter was the first astronomer to provide laws that correctly describe the details of the movement of planets around the Sun, even if he did not understand the physical causes of his discoveries, later clarified by Newton who elaborated the principles of celestial mechanics and the law of universal gravitation, completely eliminating the distinction between terrestrial and celestial phenomena. Among other things Newton also invented the reflector telescope.
British astronomer John Flamsteed cataloged over 3000 stars, while improvements in telescope quality followed further discoveries. More extensive star catalogues were compiled by Lacaille and William Herschel, who compiled a detailed catalogue of nebulae and clusters, before discovering, in 1781, the planet Uranus. The first estimate of the distance of a star occurred in 1838, when Friedrich Bessel measured the parallax of 61 Cygni.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, the study of the problem of the three bodies of Euler, Clairaut and D'Alembert led to more precise predictions of the movements of the Moon and planets, and this study was subsequently perfected by Lagrange and Laplace, allowing the masses of the planets and the Moon to be obtained from the perturbations they exercised.
Significant advances in astronomy occurred with the introduction of new technologies, such as spectroscopy and astrophotography. It was discovered that the stars are objects very far away and it was proved that they were similar to the Sun, but different in mass, temperature and size. With the advent of spectroscopy it was possible to study the physical nature of the stars, which led to astrophysics, that is to say to the physics applied to the study of the celestial bodies. Fraunhofer discovered about 600 lines in the spectrum of the Sun in 1814-1815, attributable to several chemical elements, as later, in 1859, described the German physicist Kirchhoff.
The existence of our galaxy, the Milky Way, and the understanding that it was an isolated cluster of stars compared to the rest of the Universe, was tested only in the 20th century, together with the discovery of the existence of other galaxies. Very soon, thanks to the use of spectroscopy, we realized that many objects had redshifts, that is, a shift of the spectrum towards the red compared to what was expected. This was explained only by the Doppler effect, which was interpreted as a difference of negative motion, that is, of distance from our planet. It was then formulated the theory of the expansion of the Universe. Theoretical astronomy led to speculations about the existence of objects such as black holes and neutron stars, which were used to explain some phenomena observed, such as quasar, pulsar, blazar and radiogalaxies.
Cosmology, a discipline that has broad sectors in common with astronomy, has made enormous progress in the 20th century, with the Big Bang model, supported by experimental evidence provided by astronomy and physics, such as the existence and properties of cosmic background radiation, the Hubble Law and the study of the cosmological abundance of chemical elements. Space telescopes have allowed to observe parts of the electromagnetic spectrum normally blocked or shielded in part by the Earth's atmosphere.
In astronomy, the main method of obtaining information requires the detection and analysis of electromagnetic radiation. A traditional division of astronomy is given following the different regions of the electromagnetic spectrum that are observed. Some parts of the spectrum can be observed from the Earth's surface, while other parts can only be observed at high altitude or outside the Earth's atmosphere, since the analysis from Earth of different types of radiation (infrared, X-rays, gamma rays, etc.) is penalized by atmospheric absorption. However, even in the vacuum it is difficult to separate the signal from the "bottom noise," i.e., from the huge infrared emission produced by the Earth or by the same instruments. Any object that is above the absolute zero (0 K, -273,15 °C) emits electromagnetic signals and, for this reason, everything that surrounds the instruments produces background radiation. Produce a thermograph of a celestial body without knowing the temperature at which the instrument is found is very difficult: in addition to using special photographic films, the instruments are continuously cryogenically refrigerated with helium and hydrogen.
One of the oldest branches of astronomy, and of all science, is the measurement of the positions in the sky of celestial objects. Historically, precise knowledge of the positions of Sun, Moon, planets and stars was essential in astronomical navigation (the use of celestial objects as a navigation guide) and in the realization of calendars.
The accurate measurement of the positions of the planets has led to a remarkable understanding of gravitational perturbations and the ability to determine the past and future positions of the planets with great precision has led to the birth of the branch known as celestial mechanics. Over the last decades, monitoring of objects close to the Earth has allowed to foresee ever more meticulously close encounters or possible collisions with objects such as asteroids or comets.
The measurement of the star parallax of nearby stars provides a fundamental basis for defining the scale of cosmic distances and is used to measure the scale of the entire Universe. The study of nearby stars also provides a study basis for the physical properties of distant stars, making possible comparisons between objects very distant from each other. The measurements of radial velocity and motion proper to the stars allow astronomers to trace the movement of these systems through the Milky Way. Astrometric data also serves to calculate the distribution of dark matter that is thought to exist in the Galaxy.
In the 1990s, the use of Doppler spectroscopy to measure the radial velocity of nearby stars was used to detect large extrasolar planets orbiting some of them.
The telescope was the first instrument for the observation of the sky. Although its invention is attributed to Hans Lippershey, the first to use it for astronomical use was Galileo Galilei, who decided to build one himself. Since then, the technological progress of this instrument has been continuous, thanks above all to the improvement of optics and pointing systems.
The largest one is the one consisting of four mirrors with a diameter of 8.2 meters at the European Southern Observatory (ESO), which together compose the Very Large Telescope (VLT)
Radio astronomy is based on the observation of celestial objects through radio telescopes, paraboloid antennas that collect and record radio waves at a wavelength greater than 1 millimeter.
Radio astronomy has allowed an important increase in astronomical knowledge, with the discovery of many classes of new objects, including pulsars, quasars, active galaxies, radiogalaxies and blazars. This is due to the fact that electromagnetic radiation allows to "see" objects that cannot be detected with optical astronomy. These objects constitute some of the most extreme and energetic physical processes of the universe.
This method of observation is constantly developing and with unexplored potential.
Much of the radiation from space (situated between 1 and 1000 μm) is absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere; for this purpose today's infrared telescopes are built on very high mountains, or placed on special aircraft and also on satellites launched in orbit around the Earth. The detection and study of infrared radiation is particularly useful for objects too cold to radiate visible light, such as planets, circumstellar disks or nebulae whose light is blocked by dark dusts. At the wavelengths of the infrared it is possible to detect protostellals inside molecular clouds or galactic nuclei. Some molecules radiate strongly in the infrared and can be detected by study in this band, such as water in comets.
Ultraviolet astronomy bases its activity in the detection and study of ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength of between 10 and 320 nm. This field of study covers all fields of astronomy; the observations made by this method are very precise and have allowed significant progress in the discovery of the composition of the interstellar and intergalactic medium, of the surroundings of the stars, of the evolution and interactions in double star systems and of the physical properties of the quasars and other active star systems. In the observations made with the International Ultraviolet Explorer artificial satellite, scientists discovered that the Milky Way is surrounded by a high temperature gas aura. This system also measured the ultraviolet spectrum of a supernova that was born in the Great Magellan Cloud in 1987. This band of electromagnetic spectrum is normally used for the study of warm blue stars, of type O and B, for planetary nebulae and supernova remains.
It is thought that X-ray emissions come from sources containing matter at very high temperatures; often sources experience gas emissions with temperatures in the order of 10 million kelvins. The discovery in 1962 of the first X-ray source from space turned into a surprise. This source called Scorpio X-1 is located in the constellation of the Scorpio towards the center of the Milky Way. For this discovery Riccardo Giacconi obtained the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2002. X-ray sources can be X-ray binaries, pulsars, supernova remains, active galaxies, elliptical galaxies and clusters of galaxies.
Gamma rays are radiation emitted by celestial objects involved in extremely violent energy processes. Some stars emit gamma flashes, considered the most luminous physical phenomena of the universe producing a huge amount of energy in relatively short times, which can last from a few milliseconds to a few hours. Long-lasting ones, more than two seconds, are often caused by supernova explosions, neutron stars, black holes and active galaxies; the study in this wavelength is used for detecting cosmic background radiation and to clarify the origin of the Big Bang.
All of the above disciplines are based on photons detection, but you can also get information by detecting cosmic rays and neutrinos.
In the astronomy of neutrinos, shielded underground structures are used for neutrino detection. Most of these particles that have been detected come from the Sun, however some have also been detected from the supernova remainder of the 1987a SN, in the Great Magellan Cloud. Cosmic rays, consisting of high-energy particles, can decay or be absorbed when entering the Earth's atmosphere, giving rise to a cascade of secondary particles that can be detected by observers. Some future neutrino detectors may be sensitive to the particles produced when cosmic rays affect the Earth's atmosphere.
Astronomy of gravitational waves is an emerging sector of astronomy that uses gravitational wave detectors to collect data on massive and distant objects. Specific observers such as the LIGO (Laser Interferometer Gravitational Observatory) were built, which on September 14, 2015 observed gravitational waves from a binary black hole. Successive gravitational waves were detected on December 26, 2015 and January 4, 2017 and are expected to detect others in the future, despite the extreme sensitivity required by the instruments for this type of observations.
Considering the diversity of celestial objects and phenomena present in the universe, professional astronomers are specialized in the study of specific astronomical disciplines, and hardly an astronomer can deal with more than one of these subdisciplines.
The most frequently studied star is the Sun, the mother star of the solar system, placed at a distance of just 8 minutes light. The Sun is a typical star of main sequence of class G2 V (also called yellow dwarfs), of about 4.6 billion years of age. Although it is not considered a variable star, it also undergoes periodic variations of its activity: it is the one-tenth cycle of solar activity, during which the sunspots, regions with temperatures lower than the average and associated with magnetic activity, vary in number.
The luminosity of the Sun is constantly increasing; since it became a star of the main sequence its luminosity has increased by 40%, and throughout its history it has undergone periodic variations of luminosity that may have had a significant impact on the Earth. The minimum of Maunder, for example, is thought to have caused the phenomenon of the small ice age during the Middle Ages.
The visible outer surface of the Sun is called the photosphere, above which there is a subtle region known as the chromosphere, which is surrounded by a transition region characterized by a rapid increase in temperatures, up to the very hot crown. At the center of the Sun there is the nucleus, in which temperature and pressure are high enough to allow nuclear fusion. Above the nucleus there is the radiative zone, where the plasma conducts the flow of energy through irradiation, and above it there is the convection zone, where the energy is instead expelled outwards by the physical displacement of matter. It is believed that it is the movement of matter within the convection zone to create the magnetic activity that generates the sunspots.
The solar wind, consisting of flow of plasma particles, is constantly irradiated to the outside of the solar system, until, at the outer limit, it reaches the heliopause. When the solar wind arrives near the Earth, it interacts with the Earth's magnetic field and is diverted, however some particles are trapped creating the bands of Van Allen that surround the Earth. Polar auroras are generated when the particles of the solar wind are pushed by the magnetic flow towards the Earth's magnetic poles, where they interact with the ionosphere.
Planetary science, or planetology, is the study of the physical properties of planets, satellites, dwarf planets, comets, asteroids and other bodies in orbit around the Sun, as well as extrasolar planets. The solar system has been relatively well studied, initially through telescopes and later by space vehicles. This has provided a good understanding of the formation and evolution of the solar system, even if new discoveries occur continuously.
The solar system is divided into inner planets, the belt of the asteroids and outer planets. The inner terrestrial planets are Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, while the outer giant gaseous planets are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Beyond Neptune is the Kuiper belt, and finally, the Oort cloud, which can extend up to a light year. The planets formed 4.6 billion years ago in the protoplanetary disk that surrounded the newborn Sun, through a process that has led, over time, to the birth of the protonets. Only the planets with sufficient mass have maintained their gaseous atmosphere.
Once a planet reaches a sufficient mass, materials of different density are secreted inside, during the process leading to planetary differentiation, and that can form a rocky or metallic nucleus, surrounded by an outer cloak and crust. The nucleus may include regions of solid and liquid matter, and some planetary nuclei may be able to generate their own magnetic field, able to protect their atmospheres from the solar wind, as happened for the Earth.
The internal heat of a planetary body is produced by the collisions that created it, or by the decay of radioactive materials (e.g. uranium), or by the tidal warming caused by interactions with other bodies. Some planets and satellites accumulate enough heat to generate geological processes such as volcanism and tectonic plaques. Those that maintain an atmosphere may also undergo erosion of the surface caused by wind or water. The smaller bodies, without tidal warming, cool faster; and their geological activity completely ceases, with the exception of craterization caused by impacts.
The study of stars and their evolution is fundamental for our understanding of the Universe. Star astrophysics has been determined through theoretical observations and simulations. Star formation occurs in regions dense of dust and gas, known as giant molecular clouds, which when destabilized can collapse by gravity forming protostellas, within which, if the nuclei are dense and hot enough, nuclear fusion will be activated, thus creating a star of main sequence.
Almost all the heavier elements of hydrogen and helium have been created within the nuclei of the stars.
The characteristics of the resulting star depend mainly on its initial mass: the more massive the star, the more luminous it will be, and the faster it will end the internal hydrogen reserve to be transformed into helium. Over time, when hydrogen has completely transformed into helium, the star begins to evolve, since the fusion of helium requires a higher internal temperature. A star with a sufficiently high internal temperature will push its outer layers to the surface, increasing the density of the nucleus. The resulting red giant formed by the expanding outer layers will have short life, before even the helium is totally consumed. Very massive stars can have several evolutionary phases, melting gradually heavier elements.
The final destiny of the star depends on its mass; in the mass stars above about eight times the Sun occurs the collapse of the nucleus leading to the explosion of the dying star in supernova, while the smaller stars expel their outer layers leaving as residue an inert and dense white dwarf, with the expelled layers forming a planetary nebula. The remains of the supernovas are instead neutron stars, even denser than white dwarfs, or, in the case of particularly massive stars, black holes. Stars of binary systems can follow more complex evolutionary paths, such as the transfer of mass to white dwarf companions that can also lead to the explosion in supernovae. The planetary nebulae and supernovae enrich the interstellar medium of the "metals" produced by the star during its existence; without them, all the new stars (and their planetary systems) would be formed only by hydrogen and helium. For this reason the old stars that have formed in the early days of the universe are usually poor of stars in the opposite form of metal.
Our solar system orbits within the Milky Way, an important barred spiral galaxy member of the Local Group of galaxies. It is a rotating mass of gas, dust, stars and other objects, held together by the mutual gravitational attraction. Wide portions of the Milky Way that are obscured to sight, and the Earth itself are found in one of the dense arms of dust that make it up.
In the center of the Milky Way there is the nucleus, a bar-shaped swelling in which there is the supermassive black hole Sagittarius A*. The nucleus is surrounded by four main spiral arms, high-stellar regions and consequently rich in young stars of population I. The galactic disc is surrounded by a halo populated by older stars and dense concentrations of stars known as globular clusters.
Among the stars is the interstellar medium and in the denser regions, molecular clouds of hydrogen and other elements create regions of intense star formation; when massive stars are formed, they transform the cloud into an H II region (ionized hydrogen) illuminating the gas and plasma present. The star winds and supernova explosions of these stars can cause the dispersion of the cloud, forming one or more young open clusters of stars.
Cinematic studies on the Milky Way and other galaxies have shown that there is a considerable amount of dark matter that predominates over the visible matter and whose gravitational effects are evident, although the nature of this matter remains little known.
The study of objects outside our galaxy is a branch of astronomy that deals with the formation and evolution of galaxies, their morphology and classification, the observation of active galaxies, and the groups and clusters of galaxies; it is also important for the understanding of the large-scale structure of the cosmos.
Most galaxies are classified according to their shape in three distinct classes: spiral, elliptical and irregular, in turn divided into subclasses. As the name suggests, an elliptical galaxy has the shape of an ellipse and the stars within it move along random orbits without a preferential direction. These galaxies contain little interstellar dust and few regions of star formation, and are therefore composed of relatively old stars. They are generally located in the center of clusters of galaxies, and are thought to be formed by fusions of large galaxies.
A spiral galaxy has the shape of a rotating disk, usually bulging in the center, with spiral-shaped luminous arms winding outwards. Arms are generally regions of star formation where young and hot massive stars contribute to give the arms a blueish color. They are usually surrounded by a halo of older stars. Both the Milky Way and one of our most important neighbors, the Andromeda Galaxy, are spiral galaxies.
Irregular galaxies are apparently chaotic, without any resemblance to elliptical galaxies or spiral galaxies. They are about a quarter of all galaxies present in the universe and those of peculiar shape are probably the result of some gravitational interaction.
An active galaxy is a galaxy that emits, above all from its core, a considerable amount of energy not generated by stars, dusts and gases, but probably from falling material to a supermassive black hole in the center.
A radiogalaxy is a very bright galaxy in the spectrum band of radio waves, which often emits large plumes and gas lobes. Active galaxies that emit high-energy radiation at shorter frequencies are the Seyfert galaxies, quasars, and blazars. Quasars are considered to be the brightest objects in the known universe. On a larger scale groups and clusters of galaxies constitute the supermasses, which in turn constitute complexes of supermasses, linked together by filaments, that connect these structures separated from each other by large empty spaces.
Cosmology is the science that studies the Universe as a whole. The observations of the large-scale structure of the Universe, a branch known as physical cosmology, have provided a profound understanding of the formation and evolution of the cosmos. Fundamental to modern cosmology is the well-accepted theory of the Big Bang, which predicts that our Universe was formed by a single gravitational singularity in time and space, and has expanded over the next 13.8 billion years, reaching the present conditions. The concept of the Big Bang was born when the background radiation was discovered in 1965.
During this expansion, the Universe has undergone several evolutionary phases. It is thought that in the very first moments the Universe has undergone a very rapid process of cosmic inflation, which homogenized the starting conditions and that the nucleosynthesis subsequently produced the abundance of the primordial elements. When the first stable atoms formed, the space became transparent to the radiation, releasing the energy seen as microwave background radiation. The expanding Universe then passed through a dark age due to the lack of stellar energy sources.
From small variations (or ripples) in the density of matter in space began to form the first structures: the matter accumulated in the denser regions formed clouds of gas and the first stars were born, the population III. These massive stars triggered the process of reionization creating many of the heavy elements in the primordial universe, which, through nuclear decay, created lighter elements, allowing the nucleosynthesis to continue for longer.
Little by little, the structures of gas and dust merged to form the first galaxies, and over time, these grouped into clusters of galaxies, and then into supermasses. Fundamental to the structure of the Universe is the existence of dark matter and dark energy, which is thought to be the dominant components of the universe, forming 96% of the total mass. For this reason, numerous efforts have been made in an attempt to understand the physics of these components.
There are other disciplines, moreover, which, although they cannot be considered branches of astronomy, are interested in arguments strongly related to it. These are:
Archaeoastronomy - the study of the astronomical knowledge of ancient peoples and architectural orientations. It is studied by historians, archaeologists and ethnologists, as well as by astronomers, using archaeological and anthropological evidences;
Astrobiology - science that deals with the origin, evolution, distribution and future of life outside the Earth both of the life of the human being and of the extraterrestrial life. It deals in particular with the question of the possible spread of other forms of life on other planets and how to detect them, trying to solve the two opposite hypotheses of the rarity of the Earth and the Copernican principle. Exobiology is almost a synonym, however it deals specifically with extraterrestrial environments and their effects on biological life;
Astrochemistry - the study of the chemistry of the interstellar medium, in particular of the molecular clouds of gas;
Astrophotography - for the study and development of methods for obtaining astronomical images.
Self-construction: for the study and design of methods for the self-construction of telescopes and instruments for astronomy by astronomers.
Astronautics - Coined by the term "aeronautical" it deals with the construction of useful instruments for observation, such as satellites, and the exploration of the Cosmos.
Nautical astronomy - part of astronomy that studies the resolution of position and direction problems, at sea or in flight, using the principles of spherical astronomy;
Digital astronomy - a branch of astronomy that studies methods, software and tools for obtaining digital images.
Astroparticle Physics - Uses knowledge and methods of particle physics (also called the physics of high energies) to study extremely energetic celestial phenomena or, vice versa, uses the celestial vault and extremely energetic phenomena that occur there as a privileged place of observation to obtain results on the Standard Model and its possible extensions.
Astronomy is one of those sciences to which amateurs can contribute most. Astrologers observe a variety of celestial objects and phenomena with equipment sometimes built by themselves. Common goals for astrologers are the Moon, planets, stars, comets, meteoric swarms, and a variety of objects of the deep sky, such as star clusters, galaxies and nebulae.
Astronomical associations and circles are found all over the world and their members usually carry out observation programs of different celestial objects, such as those of Messier's Catalog (110 objects) or Herschel 400 catalog or other particular categories of objects. A branch of amateur astronomy is amateur astrophotography, which provides for the acquisition of photos of the night sky. Many amateurs specialize in the observation of a certain category of objects or events that most interest them.
Most amateurs work in visible wavelengths, however a small part also devotes itself to observations outside the visible spectrum, for example through the use of infrared filters on conventional telescopes, and sometimes also with the use of radio telescopes, such as the pioneer of amateur radio astronomy, Karl Jansky, who began to observe the sky at the lengths of radio waves in 1930. A number of astronomers use homemade telescopes or radio telescopes originally built for astronomical research, but which later became available for amateurs (such as the One-Mile Telescope).
Astrophiles continue to make significant scientific contributions in the astronomical field: in case of star occultations by minor planets they can perform measurements that can help to refine the orbits of the same planets. Astrophiles can discover new comets and supernovas, asteroids and other minor bodies of the solar system, perform regular observations of variable stars to better define the peaks of light to the maximum and minimum brightness. The improvements of digital technology have allowed amateurs to make considerable progress in the field of astrophotography, moreover, through the program Planet Hunters that made public the data of the Kepler space telescope, in 2012 was discovered Kepler-64 b, the first exoplanet discovered by amateur astronomers.
Underwater Larcheology is a branch of archaeology. Due to its specificity, it requires particular techniques of investigation, and depending on the field of interest (internal waters, wrecks, seabeds...), it is divided into different disciplines.
In addition to the recovery of ancient submerged objects, it is dedicated to reconstructing and contextualizing historical finds, with the aim of protecting, preserving and enhancing the cultural heritage.
One of the first techniques for underwater archaeology is linked to the use of underwater bells, used since the sixteenth century.
Modern underwater archaeology has developed since the 1930s, with the investigation of the wreckage of the ship Elefanten, Sweden.
A peak of interest in matter occurred as a result of the two world conflicts, and the wrecks produced by these. In particular, Jacques Cousteau tells of some experiences related to the exploration of wrecks in his book The Silent World.
One of the most famous discoveries of underwater archaeology in Italy is that of the so-called Bronzi di Riace, which took place in 1972.
Even more recent are the ongoing research on the wreck of Anticitera, wreck of a shipwreck occurred in the first century BC near the island of Anticitra, found by chance in 1900 by a crew of sponge fishermen.
Among the different disciplines of underwater archaeology, can be included:
Naval archaeology: the study of technology concerning any type of vessel and its equipment;
Maritime archaeology: the search for the material remains of man and his activities on the sea, but also the discovery of ports, landings, ships and cargoes;
Archaeology of inland waters: the study of the material remains of man and his activities on rivers, lakes or lagoons (establishments, naval berths, boats);
Archaeology of wells and hypogeans: atypical sector that takes into consideration artificial structures or natural cavities, linked to particular forms of anthropization.
Although inspired by the same rules that operate in the terrestrial one, underwater archaeology needs special measures related to the operating environment. The underwater operation, in fact, involves some specific difficulties, as well as in the diving in general.
The most obvious of these problems is linked to the depth of the findings that, for example in the case of wrecks, can be so high as to cause physiological problems for operators, and require the use of specific equipment such as rebreather or different mixtures for immersion (Nitrox, Trimix). Many of the wrecks present in Italy, in fact, are located over 40 meters deep, the limit for recreational diving.
The discipline has evolved with the use of technologies such as bath-boats, drones, philo-guided diving vehicles and the development of devices to support underwater restorers for the conservation in situ of the finds. These technologies, in parallel with a refinement of the knowledge related to the physiology of the underwater, are allowing to explore wrecks and remains at ever deeper altitudes.
Underwater explorations in antiquity, curated by Francesca Dominici (file .pdf).
In cryptanalysis, frequency analysis is the study of the frequency of use of letters or groups of letters in an encrypted text. This method is used to violate classical ciphers. Quantitative surveys of texts often use some form of frequency analysis.
The analysis of the frequencies of characters, words, groups of words that can be assigned to definite terms or meanings may be interesting; these analyses may relate to a single text (from an epigraphic fragment, to a work like the Divine Comedy), an entire literary corpus or an appropriate sample of a specialized language or an entire language.
In particular, a first method used in cryptanalysis activities is based on the fact that in each language the frequency of use of each letter is rather determined; this is true strictly only for long texts, but often even short texts have frequencies not very different from those envisaged.
Let's see as a reference the percentage frequencies of the most common letters of two languages:
You can see how much the first letters of these languages are present in much greater quantities than the others, for example from a text in which a certain symbol appears more than 12% of the times you can easily guess that that symbol corresponds to the letter E (in English the distance of the E from the other letters is even more marked).
In particular the various letters are found in the phrases in Italian with the frequency
Aerophone instruments (Hornbostel-Sachs classification: cat. 4) are musical instruments in which air itself is the primary medium that is put into vibration producing a sound. In the Hornbostel-Sachs classification, aerophone instruments are divided into two classes, depending on whether the air that vibrates is contained in a cavity of the instrument (resonant aerophones or real wind instruments), or not (free aerophones).
The first class includes the "free aerophones" in which the instrument directly generates a sound wave in the surrounding air, without producing a stationary wave in a volume of air enclosed by the instrument. This class includes free-lance instruments such as mouth harmonica and organ at mouth of oriental origin and also other instruments such as mermaid and harmonica or vortex aerophones such as the so-called Rombo, the kneecap of the pig's paw (or button) that are swirled on themselves.
In the free aerophones (41), therefore, the vibrating air is not contained by the instrument, but is located outside, surrounds it.
In the "free detour airplanes" (411) (e.g. whip, saber blade that emits the characteristic whistling, etc.) the air hits a sharp body, or a sharp body is moved through the air.
The passage of air in the "free break airphones" (412) is periodically interrupted, generating an audible frequency.
"Aerophones with an anclad break" (412.1) have an ace on which is directed and forced a flow of air that puts it in vibration, originating a periodic interruption of the flow itself, take into account the fact that in the aerophones of this type, if there are tubes, the air does not vibrate in a primary, but secondary way, that is, enriching the sound timbrely (canne to ancail of the organ).
Again, we find in the free anchovies interrupting aerophones:
double hinged ances (412.11) (e.g. the stem of grass split in two);
single free ances (412.131);
and free ances in series (412.132) (harmonium, mouth harmonica, accordion...);
as well as taped ances (412.14) (obtained, for example, in blowing against the sharp edges of a lanceolate leaf or a paper sheet).
In the "free air-phones with displacement interruption" (412.21) (such as in the drilled disc siren) it is the interrupting device that moves without the intervention of an air flow.
In the "free airplanes with a vortex break" (422.22) (such as the turbot, the blend, but also the blade fan that emits the characteristic sound), the interrupting device rotates around its own axis.
In the "explosion airphones" ("413"), the air is hit by a single compression pulse (the balloon that bursts, the air bag burst, the tube, the hatch as an old-fashioned child's toy).
Wind instruments (or resonant aerophones)
The second great class of aerophones is that of the real wind instruments. (H.F.:42)
To this (with all possible variants catalogued by the Hornbostel-Sachs classification) belong the types:
anclad tubes (422), in turn divided into oboes (422.1), clarinets (422.2), free-lance tubes (422.3);
of the trumpets (423), in turn divided into "natural trumpets" (423.1) and "chromatic trumpets" (423.2).
With regard to the air reserve, airphones can receive airflow from the lungs of the performer or from other sources, drawing from an air tank. In practice the air is not insufflated directly into the wind instrument, but is accumulated in reservoirs (sampoms, bagpipes) or loaded with mantics (reed organs, accordions, diatonic organ, etc.) it is also possible to use the mouth of the performer as an air tank (launeddas, continuous breathing with trumpets, sax, clarinets in jazz performances, etc.).
Historical designations in Western culture
In Western culture the wind instruments (also called briefly "fiati") are often still indicated and classified with the historical names of brass and wood, based precisely on the materials of construction in past times, and no longer adequate. In the common use we find among the brass: trumpets and horns, trombones, tuba, basstube and flutorni, French horn. While among the woods there are: flute and octave, clarinet and bass clarinet, saxophones, oboe and English horn, bassoon and counterfagotto.
The art in its broadest meaning includes every human activity, carried out individually or collectively, which leads to forms of creativity and aesthetic expression, based on technical measures, innate or acquired skills and behavioral norms deriving from study and experience. Therefore, art is a language, that is the ability to transmit emotions and messages. However, there is not a single artistic language and not even a single unambiguous code of interpretation, even there is not even a term equivalent to "art" in most spoken languages.
In its most sublime meaning art is the aesthetic expression of the interiority and human soul. It reflects the opinions, feelings and thoughts of the artist in the social, moral, cultural, ethical or religious context of his historical period.
Some philosophers and scholars of semantics, on the other hand, argue that there is an objective language that, regardless of eras and styles, should be codified in order to be understood by all, however the efforts to demonstrate this claim have been fruitless.
Art can also be considered a profession of ancient tradition carried out in the observance of some canons codified over time. In this sense the artisan professions, i.e. those that cling to the crafts, often descended from the Middle Ages, when specialized activities were developed and the exhibitors arts and crafts were brought together in the guilds. Each art had its own tradition, whose fundamental concepts were enclosed in the rule of art, to which each artist had to conform.
Historical evolution of the concept of art
Analyzing the history of the concept of art we see that over time it undergoes a gradual but radical transformation.
Antiquity: Sanskrit Are (ordinary) Latin: Ars, Greek: Τέχνη was therefore meant to mean the ability to make some object. The ability consisted in the knowledge of the rules, by which it was possible to produce an object. The art therefore included what we would call craftsmanship, plus a part of the sciences (Astronomy, History). Moreover, the ancient Greeks did not use terms such as Music, Architecture or Visual Arts to indicate an artistic discipline: these terms did not exist or had a meaning other than the modern one. Instead, they used concepts of minor extension, such as: "mimicic", "commedia" and "tragedia," concepts that are included in the context of the Theatre. From the idea of art remained outside the Poetry in that, even if it was included in the field of knowledge, it was deprived of the typical characteristics of art: first, since it was mostly recited and sung, it was not a material production, therefore it was not based on specific rules but on the Museum, it was thus considered to be able to be considered the individual invention; second place of the Poesis, it was considered to be considered to believe.
In the Hellenistic period the first classifications began and the arts were divided into municipalities and liberals, depending on whether they required physical effort or intellectual effort.
In the Middle Ages, the common arts began to be re-evaluated, which will be called mechanical, but will continue to have a subalternal role in relation to liberal arts. From the "mechanical" arts different of what we call "beautiful arts" were excluded, such as painting and sculpture; liberal and mechanical arts were reduced to the number of sects, and among those that required physical effort, only the arts that improved the life of man, that nourished him, repaired him from the weather, that is those arts whose particular point was the utility as well as the pleasantness. Two reference lists of these medieval mechanical arts are known: those of Ugo di San Vittore and Rodolfo di Longo Campo.
The poetry does not yet fall within the conceptual sphere of art indicated in modern times, as the poet was considered a vase composing the verses inspired by God, or by the Muses in Ancient Greece. There was no rule in poetic compositions, at least as far as the content is concerned. To provide the essential contribution for poetry to be considered an art was Bernardo Segni who in 1549 translated into vulgar the poetics of Aristotle, a work in which Stagirita already included poetry among other arts.
The social status of artists, which improved considerably during the Renaissance, helped to separate them from scientists and artisans.
In 1735 Baumgarten coined the aesthetic term using it for the first time in his degree thesis In 1750 he published an essay entitled Æsthetica.
Charles Batteux in 1746 defined, in his book Le belle arti reduced to a single principle, the system of fine arts, indicating five arts in its own sense - painting, sculpture, poetry, music, dance - to which he associated two connected arts - eloquence and architecture - whose common character resided in the imitation of reality for the purpose of creating beautiful objects.
From the end of the eighteenth century the first crises of the concept of beauty and art began.
New forms of expression were emerging, such as photography, industrial architecture, home objects, and they had to be part of the concept of art.
For this reason in the twentieth century the idea of an all-inclusive definition of art and work of art was abandoned. The term art becomes an open concept, in which all possible definitions of art converge.
The twentieth century is the spokesperson for the intimist growth carried out by the thinkers of the previous century, but it renews the interior needs of the artist and becomes the spokesperson for technical innovation, of which the new materials (iron and prefabricated elements) are the fundamental elements.
The new architecture must be the sign of cultural and social renewal, for this reason we proceed to a homogeneity of the characteristics of the new architectural construction, we establish a new character, a "modern style."
Within the "Modernism" are summarized and interact the artistic currents that in the previous two decades interpret and accompany the progressive effort of industrial civilization.
When the enthusiasm for industrial progress follows the awareness of the transformation that operates in the structures of life and society, around 1910, within the Modernism, the artistic avant-gardes are formed with the aim of changing the ways and purposes of art.
The main forms of art, from which emanate or connect all the other (called minor arts) are traditionally seven, each associated with a Musa:
Painting (including drawing, engraving and today digital graphics)
Sculpture (including jewellery, textile art, tapestry and origami)
Cinema (or acting, which in ancient times only concerned the theater)
Other forms of art today can also be considered:
They can be grouped into visual arts, which do not require execution because the work presents itself to the user already perfectly defined, and performing arts, which instead require the artist not only to be produced, but also performed:
Another possible division of limbs, based on human senses, is as follows:
Figurative Arts or Fine Arts:
Painting (including drawing, engraving and digital graphics)
One last division of the arts, although not all of them, is that of the "nine arts." Originally drawn in 1923 by the Italian poet Ricciotto Canudo, it was expanded with the last two voices by the French critic Claude Beylie in 1964:
Finally, the inclusion of video games as "decimate art" has been proposed more recently.
Italian legislation on cultural objects
Wikisource: Democracy and Art, by Mario Rapisardi
Wikisource: Decadence and renewal of Art, by Mario Rapisardi
Wikisource: Art is imperishable, lesson by Mario Rapisardi, December 1897
Of Jewish origins, endowed with a sardonic and volcanic personality, of anarcho-communist orientation, Abbie Hoffman organized and directed many protests against the establishment. His experiences in the early 1950s as a student of Brandeis University, Massachusetts, where he studied under Herbert Marcuse, impressed in him the spirit of rebellion. Later he obtained specialization at the University of Berkeley. Under the protection of the famous psychologist and philanthropist Abraham Maslow, Hoffman conceived political protest as a positive and immediate process.
In the early 1960s, he returned to Worcester to work as a psychologist in a state hospital. He began his political career as a human rights activist in the State of Mississippi, as an organizer of the Coordination Committee of Nonviolent Students (Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee). In the district of Haight-Ashbury, in San Francisco, Hoffman joined the Diggers (of the actors who became social activists), distributing free food and organizing accommodation.
Many of the demonstration actions he was protagonist of had resonance among the public for their theatricality. One of his most famous protest actions took place on August 24, 1967, when he led a group of opponents to capitalism and the war in Vietnam in the gallery at the New York Stock Exchange and threw dollar notes on the swingers, who began to gather them frantically. Of course, Hoffman aimed to highlight what metaphorically NYSE swingers were already doing. After the New York Stock Exchange, barriers were installed to prevent protests of the same kind. Through his involvement in the protests against the war in Vietnam, Hoffman became an icon of counterculture and the face of the American radical dissidio.
Hoffman joined many of the main protesters of the state of things in the 1960s, such as John Lennon and Yōko Ono, Tom Hayden, Timothy Leary and G. Gordon Liddy, and distinguished himself for his way of merging creativity and his typical wild humor in protest actions. He pioneered many tactics in the guerrilla guerrilla survival and personal autonomy. During the Vietnam War, he led people in manifestation around the Pentagon in an attempt to levitate the building in the air by means of the psychic energy of the crowd.
Hoffman was arrested during the Democratic Convention in Chicago in 1968, in which the Yippie party was trying to run for president a pig named Pigasus, as a member of the group of people who was nicknamed "the Chicago Seven" (the Chicago Seven). Jerry Rubin, the future senator of California Tom Hayden and the activist of the Black Panthers Bobby Seale, were also arrested together with him. During the trial, the theatres of Abbie Hoffman often won the headlines, such as when, invited to testify, he took an oath raising the middle finger instead of the entire hand. On the day of the sentence (the accusations were finally overturned by the court of appeal) Hoffman invited the judge to try LSD.
At the Woodstock Festival, held in Bethel in 1969, Hoffman interrupted the Who performance to make a protest speech against John Sinclair's imprisonment of the White Panthers Party (White Panther Party). Who Pete Townshend's guitarist didn't take well the interruption of his group's performance and hit him with his guitar by kicking him off the stage. Pete Townshend later stated that he agreed with Hoffman about the imprisonment of John Sinclair. In his last book, I laughed at the power, Abbie Hoffman denies that Townshend hit him with his guitar and relegated the episode to mere metropolitan legend.
In 1973 Hoffman was involved in a sale of cocaine and captured by agents in the bourgeoisie. By fleeing and resorting to various tricks to not be recognized (including facial plastic), Hoffman lived in hiding for six years, continuing to be an activist under Barry Freed's false name. The FBI compiled pages of documentation on him and hired two psychologists to analyze his personality. He was banned from circulation in eleven states. In 1980 Hoffman came out of hiding and had to serve a brief sentence to the prison before returning to social activism.
Hoffman fought on many fronts, but his passions were now largely personal, in an environment that had drastically changed since the death of the countercultures of the sixties and seventies. Psychosis, drug abuse and the breaking of relationships made his personal life very messy; the media emphasized contradictions and flaws in his way of acting. Despite this he continued continuously to practice his activism and to try to mobilize students on university campuses. In 1987 he was arrested for the forty-second time, while protesting, along with about thirty people, against the recruitment of the CIA at the University of Massachusetts.
At a meeting of the Seven in Chicago in 1988, Hoffman described himself as "an American dissident. I don't think my goals have changed since I was 4 years old and I was fighting with bullies at school." He was found dead on April 12, 1989 and officially his death was recorded as suicide caused by the ingestion of a large dose of  barbiturgical. He didn't live long enough to see the resurrection of the antagonistic movement and radical dissidentship in the nineties by a considerable variety of progressive foundations (movements against economic globalization).
He is the author of several books including Ruba this book (original title: Steal this Book), Fuck the System and Revolution for the Hell of It. The first of these, which in the United States sold 2 million copies, was published in Italy by Stampa Alternativa.
Steal This Album!, third work of the System of a Down, has in the title a reference to the aforementioned book.
Abbie Hoffman's life is documented in the film Steal this Movie.
His participation in the Chicago Seven trial, as a defendant, is told in Aaron Sorkin's film The Chicago 7 trial.
In the film Forrest Gump appears a figure that alludes to Abbie Hoffman, dressed in his famous shirt made from an American flag, who gives a speech against the Vietnam War in Washington in front of a crowd of hippies.
Director Oliver Stone dedicated the film Nato to him on July 4, released the same year as Hoffman's death.
Books written by Abbie Hoffman
The complete text of the book Steal this book
Human Rights Activists
L'Adige (AFI: ; formerly also Adice, ; Etsch in German and South Tyrolean dialect, Hadesc in Ladin, Hades in Trentino, Àdexe in Veneto, , ) is a river in north-eastern Italy, for length of about 410 km, the second Italian river after the Po, the third for breadth of basin after Po and Tiber, the fourth for volume of water after Po, Ticino and Tiber, with 235 m3/s of average annual flow at the mouth.
It is born at the Passo Resia (Reschenpass) in the Upper Val Venosta (Obervinschgau) in South Tyrol and flows into the Adriatic Sea at the municipalities of Chioggia and Rosolina, in the respective hamlets of Ca'lino di Chioggia and Rosolina Mare, after having crossed the cities of Trento, Rovereto, Verona, Legnago, Cavarzere, Lambendo Merano, Bolzano and Rovigo, passing entirely through the regions of Trentino-Alto Adige and Veneto. The valley in which it flows takes various names: Val Venosta between the spring and Merano, valley of Adige between Merano and Trento, Vallagarina between Trento and Verona, and then Val Padana between Verona and the mouth, with a large area right of the river near the mouth which is also part of the Po MAB UNESCO Delta Park (Riserva della biosphere).
Altogether its catchment area is km2 (which makes it the third in Italy for amplitude after the Po and the Tiber): of these well 7,200 are in the province of Bolzano, in whose territory it flows for 140 km (over 1/3 of its total route), while the remaining are divided between the provinces of Trento, Verona, Padua, Rovigo and Venice.
Its main tributaries are:
Río Ram (Rambach) near Glorenza (Glurns) (BZ);
Passirio (Passer) near Merano (Meran) (BZ);
Isarco (Eisack) near Bolzano (Bozen) (BZ);
Walnut at Zambana (TN);
the Fersina near Trento (TN);
Leno near Rovereto (TN);
Alpone at Albaredo d'Adige (VR).
In its initial section, the river Ram (Rambach) flows into the monastery valley, politically belonging to Switzerland (Cantone dei Grisoni).
The river Adige follows the path and in its path you can find above all flat or mountainous areas, with alpine, continental and mild climates in summer or spring. On its shores there is almost always a strip of vegetation, including plants of broadleaf and shrubs, of a bright green, donated precisely by the waters of the river.
The river has been the protagonist of some devastating floods. Already in Roman times its hydrography underwent a variation: Pliny the Elder no longer mentions the Po of Adria because the Adige had undergone a course and had flown into the Filistina and other two canals, called Fossone and Carbonaria (Po di Goro).The route of the Cucca, the catastrophic flood of the sixth century (589), according to the chronicles of Paolo Deacon, caused death and destruction in Verona and in the countryside.There is news of other phenomena of this type in the past: among the most serious are to remember the floods of 1882, 1966 and 1981.
On November 9, 1046 the course of the river was barred for more than ten days following a landslide caused by a violent earthquake in the middle of the Adige valley.
In 1474, near Castel Firmiano near Bolzano, the Adige in full - called in the document "Wasszer Etsch" - had flooded and destroyed the passageways, to which the dukes of Austria put in place measures to restore road communications.
In 1858 the course of the river was diverted from the center of the city of Trento with a shift of the course to the west: it was necessary to correct the route that originally made a loop to the east, almost under the walls of the castle of Buonconsiglio. This operation, which in the projects had to be used to avoid floods and full in the center of the city, in fact profoundly transformed the area of the original track.
In September 1882 the river broke the banks in nine places in Bolzano and San Michele all'Adige, and flooded the northern part of the city of Trento; the flood also caused a flood in Verona and a flood in Polesine. Precisely to save the city of Verona from possible floods, in the first half of the twentieth century was designed, built and completed in 1959 a tunnel drainer (Adige-Garda Gallery) that connects Adige to Mori resort with Lake Garda in Nago-Torbole and that is able to convey the excess waters from the river to the lake. Due to the remarkable difference in temperature and quality of the waters, it was used to travase the waters very rarely, only when strictly necessary. The tunnel was used only 12 times between 1960 and 2022: in 1960, 1965, 1966 (twice), 1976, 1981, 1983, 2000, 2002, 2018 and 2022. The use of the scoolator must be coordinated with the level of the Lake Mincio for avoiding Lake Garda and the river.
In November 1966 the city of Trento knew the biggest flood in its history: most of the city and about 5,000 hectares of country were submerged by about two meters of water. Following the flood, the banks were raised by about one meter. In July 1981 the banks collapsed near Salorno which was submerged together with the surrounding countryside.
In 2019 the maximum flow rate that can pass through the river was 2,500 m3/s and was equivalent to a return time of 200 years.
During the Middle Ages Adige was also the scene of important military actions, as in 1439, when the joint fleets of Visconti and Gonzaga, then at war against Venice, managed to climb up the river and first besieged Legnago and then threw a bridge of fortified boats downstream of Verona to block supplies to the city, while in 1487, still along the Adige, in Calliano the Venetians were defeated by the army of Duke Sigismondo of Austria.
Along the banks of the river, taking advantage of the roads of the banks, develops the cycle path of the Adige valley, one of the longest present in Italy, which unites the province of Verona with that of Bolzano.
Every year in October in the stretch between Borghetto (TN) and Pescantina (VR) there is the Adige marathon, a canoe competition at both competitive and amateur level.
The itinerary of the Adige (photogallery)
Mauro Vittorio Quattrina "L'Adige di carta." Docufilm narrated in "first person" by Berto Barbarani played by Stefano Paiusco - 2019 -
Eugenio Turri, L'Adige: the river, men, history, Verona: Cierre, 1997. ISBN 88-85923-40-2
The De Gasperi-Gruber agreement (also known as the Paris agreement, Gruber-De-Gasperi-Abkommen in German), so called by the names of the then Italian Foreign Ministers (Alcide De Gasperi) and Austrian (Karl Gruber), is an international treaty signed on 5 September 1946 in Paris in the margins of the work of the Peace Conference, to define the question of the protection of the German linguistic minority of Trentino-Alto Adige.
After the First World War, the Treaty of Saint-Germain had awarded Italy the Trentino-Alto Adige which, although geographically incardinated in the Italian peninsula, was populated mainly by German-speaking inhabitants (this mainly concerns South Tyrol, although there were still small German-speaking communities in Trentino). The fascist government adopted a series of measures aimed at the suppression of the German ethnic and cultural identity. The use of the German language in public and its teaching were prohibited. Further measures such as the obligation to Italianization of surnames, aimed at the oppression of German ethnic and cultural identity. Special military measures were also adopted (building of the Alpine Valley in South Tyrol). A massive industrialization was also carried out. Added to this was the demographic policy of fascism (see Italianization), culminated in the options in South Tyrol (and partly in Trentino), which saw the massive adhesion of the German-speaking population to the transfer to the Nazi Reich.
During the Second World War, Trentino and South Tyrol were occupied by German troops, received as liberators by many German-speaking inhabitants and not only, whose Resistance was rather limited (see Josef Mayr-Nusser). During the Nazi occupation serious crimes occurred that struck all language groups (see Lager of Bolzano). Many South Tyroleans and Trentinos enlisted or were enlisted in two departments at the service of the Wehrmacht: SS-Polizeiregimentiant "Bozen" and the Trentino Security Corps.
The South Tyrolean question was addressed in 1946 after the end of the war. With the approval of the Allies (and despite the resistance of the Soviet Union, which was carrying out the expulsion of the Germans from Eastern Europe), an agreement was reached between Italy and Austria. The text of the agreement was attached to the Italian peace treaty of 10 February 1947.
The Treaty was implemented by Italy, which restored the official use of German and its teaching, re-introduced the German toponyms and allowed the return of the opting, even those compromised with Nazism. The vast majority of disputes over the application of the Treaty were fully resolved at the entry of Austria into the European Union in 1995.
De Gasperi was a citizen of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and in his political activity he had developed an intimate conviction of autonomy as a means of addressing the problems of minorities; Gruber, on the other hand, was more doubtful about the intentions of the South Tyrolean: I know my fellow countrymen, they are the hardest and most tenacious element of the earth. The greater the freedom you will grant them, the more they will abuse them, if you like, to ask and insist to return to being part of Austria. All the autonomy that you Italians will grant them, with all the good will to create a collaboration with them, will be as many weapons that they will turn against themselves.Despite the pact and the putting into trouble, the De Gasperi-Gruber agreement worked and is now considered a model for multicultural territories in Europe and the world.
Paris Agreement 5 September 1946
The German-speaking inhabitants of the Province of Bolzano and those of the neighbouring bilingual municipalities of the Province of Trento will be guaranteed a complete equality of rights compared to the Italian-speaking inhabitants, within the framework of the special provisions intended to safeguard the ethnic character and the cultural and economic development of the German-speaking group.
In accordance with the legislative provisions already in force or in the process of being applicable to German-speaking inhabitants, special attention will be given to:
primary and secondary education in their mother tongue;
the equality of Italian and German languages in public offices and official documents and in bilingual topographical names;
the right to re-establish the German surnames that have been Italianized in recent years;
equality of rights with regard to admission to public administrations with a view to achieving a more appropriate proportion between the two ethnic groups in employment.
The populations of the areas mentioned above are granted the exercise of an autonomous regional legislative and executive power, under which these provisions will be applied by consulting also the local representative elements of the German language.
The Italian Government, with the aim of establishing good neighbourly relations between Austria and Italy, shall, in consultation with the Austrian Government, and within one year from the signing of this Treaty:
to review, in a spirit of fairness and broad understanding, the issue of citizenship options following the Hitler-Mussolini agreements of 1939;
to agree to the mutual recognition of the validity of certain degrees of study and university degrees;
to establish a convention for the free movement of persons and goods between North Tyrol and East Tyrol, both by rail and, as far as possible, by road;
to conclude special agreements to facilitate the expansion of border trade and local trade in certain quantities of products and goods characteristic between Austria and Italy.
Giovanni Bernardini (edited), L'Accordo De Gasperi-Gruber. Una storia internazionale, Trento, FBK Press, 2016, ISBN 978-88-98989-19-5
1946-2006: 60 years of the De Gasperi - Gruber agreement, on province.bz.it
History of the Italian Republic (1946-1963)
17 January: The UN entrusts Somalia to Italy in trust administration for a decade.
The "witch hunt" and the period of so-called maccartism begin, from the name of the U.S. senator who promoted it, Joseph McCarthy.
June 25: Korean War breaks out
January 29 - January 31: first radio broadcast of the Italian song festival (Festival di Sanremo).
24 December: Libya becomes independent from Italy.
6 February: Elizabeth II succeeds his father George VI as sovereign of the United Kingdom.
31 January - 1 February: a massive flood hits the Netherlands, England, Scotland and Belgium, causing 2 551 deaths and major damage. It will be remembered as the most serious storm in the North Sea of the 20th century.
2 June: Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II
July 26: Assault at the Moncada Caserma by Fidel Castro and Ernesto Che Guevara. The Cuban revolution begins.
Stalin dies and the Korean war ends.
3 January: RAI, Italian radio and television, begins broadcasting the television programmes of the National Programme, in black and white until 1977, then in color.
18 April - 24 April: Bandung Conference
30 September: James Dean dies in a car accident
October 28: Bill Gates is born
1 November: Vietnam war breaks out
14 December: Italy is admitted to the UN.
July 26: Egyptian President Nasser announces the nationalization of the Suez Canal.
4 November - 10 November: Soviet Union invades Hungary
On 25 March the Treaties of Rome were signed: the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community (EEC) and the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC).
Start of the Space Race. On October 4th, the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, was launched from the USSR, followed a month later by Sputnik 2, with the first living creature in space, the bitch Laika.
9 October: Pope Pius XII dies in Castel Gandolfo.
December 7: inauguration of the first section of the Autostrada del Sole in Italy, from Milan to Parma.
1 January - Cuba: dictator Fulgencio Batista abandons Havana. Fidel Castro enters the Cuban capital at the head of his troops.
In Europe, after the Second World War, it is decided to unite the continent thanks to the power of music; on May 24, 1956, in Lugano, the first edition of the European Song Festival is aired.
In the wake of the "golden age" of science fiction literature started in the previous decade, there are numerous American film productions of the genre.
In the East, Japanese cinema begins to assert itself on the international stage: after winning the Oscars as the best foreign and gold lion film at Rashomon's best film, this is decisively reconfirmed by the masterpieces I sette samurai, also by Akira Kurosawa, and Godzilla by Ishirō Honda, both of 1954.
James Dean revolves shortly before his death his successful Burned Youth
Consecration of Marlon Brando with the film The Wild
Federico Fellini debuted as a director: in 1957 and 1958 he won the Oscar at the best foreign film respectively with La strada and Le notti di Cabiria.
In 1959 Ben-Hur won 11 Oscars in 1960, record reached only 39 years later by Titanic and then by Lord of the Rings - The King's return
Thanks to the contribution as directors of various critics who since the beginning of the decade wrote in the magazine Cahiers du cinéma, begins to be born with films like I 400 hits the phenomenon carried out in the history of cinema of the French Nouvelle vague.
On the technical level, dictated also by the competition of the medium with the television (the first color devices are marketed in the USA since 1954), there are the first massive experiments of the three-dimensional vision and the application of panoramic formats in the cinemas (From La tunica of 1953, the first film to adopt the Cinemascope), while the American film production starts to abandon more and more the coloring in black and white and to deal with more mature themes (An example is The man with the arm of gold, among the first in which we speak of drug addiction) due to the consequent shift of the target audience prevailing.
Drive-ins are beginning to spread in the United States.
First animal cloning experiments by Robert Briggs and Thomas King in 1952. Annunciation by James Watson and Francis Crick of DNA double-helix structure research in 1953.
Discovery of Albert Bruce Sabin of polio vaccine in 1955.
In 1955 the anti-stick pots appeared in France.
The first cardiac stimulator is inserted in Sweden.
Curtis, Hirscowitz and Peters develop the fiber optic endoscope.
The contraceptive pill has been tested since 1954.
It was developed in 1956 by St. Mary Hospital in Manchester, the first amniocentesis.
In 1958 the first chip was created
Olivetti created in 1950 the lettering machine Letter 22 and since 1957 assembles the first mainframe computers, the Elea series.
By the end of the decade microwave ovens are beginning to spread.
The first forms of video games are born. See Video games in the fifties
Independence is achieved by seventeen African colonies.
In Sri Lanka Sirimavo Bandaranaike, leader of the LSFP, is the first woman in the world to be elected prime minister.
The economic agreements between the USA and Cuba, which conclude new agreements with the USSR, are missing.
An earthquake kills a third of the population of Agadir in Morocco.
The strongest earthquake in the 20th century struck Chile with a magnitude of 9.5. The tidal wave generated by the earthquake, in addition to destroying all the villages along 800 km of coast, runs 17,000 km and reaches Japan, on the other side of the Pacific Ocean.
Inauguration of the XVII Olympiad in Rome.
France's granting of independence to Algeria results in an attempted coup d'état organized by ultra-nationalist generals who are firmly cut off by President Charles de Gaulle.
On January 20, John Fitzgerald Kennedy became the 35th President of the United States. With his 43 years of age, he was the second youngest tenant in the White House and proposed the ambitious challenges of the "new frontier" that conquer the Americans.
On April 12, Soviet cosmonaut Jurij Gagarin was the first man to make a space flight.
In August the Soviets began the construction of the Berlin Wall.
The second channel arrives on November 4th.
Cuba's missile crisis from 15 to 28 October
On October 11, Pope John XXIII pronounced the Moon's Address.
The first single of the Beatles: Love Me Do
On August 4, Marilyn Monroe was found dead in the bedroom of her Brentwood home in Los Angeles, at the age of 36 due to an overdose of  barbiturgics.
The Soviet Union and the United States of America sign an agreement to suspend their nuclear experiments, but France and China do not join and launch their nuclear bombs in 1964 and 1965.
Martin Luther King marches peacefully on Washington, asking together with 200,000 other people, racial integration. On August 28 he gave the historic speech "I have a dream."
On March 22, Release Please Please Me, Beatles' first album.
On 3 June Pope John XXIII died, who despite the short duration of his pontificate was one of the most beloved pontiffs. John Baptist Montini succeeded him taking the name of Paul VI.
Milan on September 7 Alessandro Mazzinghi conquered the World Championship of the Junior Meds against the American Ralph Dupas.
Giulio Natta received the nobel for chemistry in 1963 for inventing plastic
On October 9th, a huge landslide overflows the Vajont dam basin, whose huge wave destroys Longarone and other villages in the valley. 2,000 people die. It will talk of disaster announced, as the geological danger of the area was aware of the building company.
On November 22 in Dallas, Texas (United States of America) John Fitzgerald Kennedy, 35rd president of the United States of America, was killed.
On November 23, the British science fiction series Doctor Who debuted in the UK on BBC.
Nikita Sergeevič Chruščëv is exauthored; Leonid Il'ič Brežnev (in charge until 1982) succeeds him.
England surrenders, after a long war (Mau-Mau revolt) and grants independence to Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania.
Civil wars continue in Congo and Biafra. The intervention of the UN's blue helmets cannot change things.
He is imprisoned in South Africa Nelson Mandela.
It is founded in Jerusalem, the Organization for the Liberation of Palestine.
The Englishman Mary Quant invents the miniskirt, which arouses scandal but immediately conquers the new generations.
American troops are being sent to South Vietnam.
Malcolm X is murdered while Martin Luther King is arrested.
Pope Paul VI solemnly closed the Second Vatican Council on 8 December.
In October, Olivetti invented the first personal computer.
The Mont Blanc tunnel is inaugurated.
On 30 December, Ferdinand Marcos was elected 10th President of the Philippines.
On 24 January Winston Churchill died in London, a British politician, historian, writer and military.
Kodak starts marketing Super 8 films.
In China, Mao Tse-tung creates the Red Guard movement in support of the great cultural revolution.
On July 30, England won the 1966 World Football Championship.
The guerrilla war against the dictatorship of Barrientos begins in Bolivia. The revolt is led by the Cuban of Argentine origin Ernesto Guevara, called Che.
Mrs Indira Gandhi becomes the Prime Minister of India.
On 4 November 1966 the Arno overflows on Florence; the lagoon submerges Venice and the islands.
On September 8, Star Trek began the TV series designed by Gene Roddenberry.
In Greece, with a coup d'état, a right-wing dictatorship was established, led by Colonel Gejorgios Papadopoulos.
June 1st is released Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, the 8th Beatles album, which became the most famous album in rock history as well as the first concept album in history.
Following the victory in the six-day war, Israel defeats a coalition composed of Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and occupies the whole of Palestine.
The Nigerian troops occupy the Biafra. It explodes a conflict that will last several years and that will cause many deaths among civilians due to hunger and famine. The population leaves the country en masse.
Francisco Franco ratified the law of succession that will lead Juan Carlos of Bourbon to become king of Spain.
Ernesto Guevara more known as Che Guevara, El Che, The Che or more simply Che, was killed on October 9 by the Bolivian army. He was a revolutionary and Argentine guerrilla.
The "Prague Spring" breaks out in Czechoslovakia. Alexander Dubček becomes secretary of the party and launches his idea of a "communism with a human face" disassociating himself from the Soviet regime. In August the Warsaw Pact tanks invade the country and report the "normality." Young Jan Palach will set fire to protest in St. Wenceslas Square in Prague.
In March, the Viet Cong launched the "Tet offensive," with fierce bombings on Saigon. The United States is forced to enter into negotiations with North Vietnam.
On April 4, Martin Luther King was assassinated. A few months later, on June 6, 1968, in Los Angeles, Robert Kennedy, a presidential candidate, was also killed.
26 May, Milan, San Siro: Alessandro Mazzinghi regains the title of World Champion WBA-WBC against the Korean Kim Soo Kim.
On November 6, Richard Nixon was elected president of the United States.
December 24: Astronauts Frank Borman, Jim Lovell and Bill Anders become the first humans to reach the Moon and orbit us around.
In the United States, the "hippy phenomenon" explodes: groups of young people, animated by pacifist and anarchist ideals, propose the return to nature and protest against the Vietnam War.
The student contest is rampant throughout Europe: in Paris, the "French May" explodes, alongside the students, protest the workers. Charles de Gaulle uses the army to suppress the demonstrations, attracting the accusation of "fascist," but in the subsequent elections he is re-elected with an overwhelming majority.
All over Italy there are student and worker disputes that will then take the name of "Sessantotto." Students occupy the main Italian universities and in Valle Giulia, Rome, at the faculty of architecture there are very hard clashes between students and police. Many organizations are born on the left of the PCI, the so-called "extra-parliamentary left" that accuse the communist party of having abandoned the road of revolution.
On January 30, the Beatles perform for the last time on the rooftops of Apple Corps
On 1 February, the first flight of the Boeing 747 quadri-jet was made.
Between June 27 and 28 in New York City, Stonewall's movements occur, considered the moment of birth of the LGBT community's defense movement.
On July 21, American astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin were the first men to walk on the Moon.
The first talks between the United States of America and the Soviet Union on the limitation of strategic weapons began in Helsinki.
Between 8 and 9 August, the massacre of Heaven Drive took place, at the hands of Charles Manson's followers, who led to the killing of five people, including actress Sharon Tate.
In Woodstock, near New York, there is an impressive gathering of hippies and a great concert is organized for the occasion that will remain in the history of music.
On 1 September, Mu'ammar Gaddafi came to power in Libya following a military coup.
On September 13, Scooby-Doo was created as one of the most famous cartoons in the early 21st century.
Construction of the first prototype of the supersonic aircraft for civil transport Concorde.
On December 12, a bomb was exploded in the center of Milan, at the National Bank of Agriculture, which caused 17 deaths and 88 wounded. Considered as the mother of all the massacres, the first and most disruptive terrorist act since the post-war period, the most incandescent moment of the strategy of tension and by some considered the beginning of the period to history in Italy as years of lead.
In 1963 the first album of The Beatles, entitled Please Please Me, was released and was very successful.
From 1964 to 1967 the phenomenon of British invasion began, major representatives of this period were groups such as The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, The Who, The Yardbirds, The Animals, Them etc.
In 1964 the duo Sonny & Cher was born.
In 1965 the first nucleus of Pink Floyd and The Doors was born.
In February 1966, the Pooh, a historic Italian group lasting 50 years, was born in Bologna.
In 1967 he released the first album of the Velvet Underground in collaboration with Nico, produced by Andy Warhol, titled The Velvet Underground & Nico
In 1968, it aired on NBC's "Comeback Special," which marked the return to Elvis Presley's scenes.
Also in 1968 Black Sabbath, Deep Purple and Led Zeppelin bands were born and will be considered as the main exponents and precursors of hard rock and heavy metal music.
In 1969, King Crimson was born.
In 1969, in Bethel (New York), the epochal Woodstock festival, culminating in the hippy counterculture of the decade, takes place. The performances of artists such as Jimi Hendrix, Joan Baez, Janis Joplin and Who will enter the annals of music history.
American cinema begins to prevail all over the world and the film that has had the most importance and success in this decade has been All together passionately, released in 1965; but at the same time, in much of the decade until its end, lives a period of crisis for reasons of various nature, especially of audience, from which the so-called New Hollywood, inaugurated in 1967 with films like The Graduate and Easy Rider, two years later.
In 1960 Ben-Hur won 11 Oscar awards, while in 1962 the musical West Side Story won 10. In the same year he debuted on the big screen the series of Agent 007. Other films that were very successful in the 1960s were:
Inauguration of spaghetti-western with Sergio Leone's fistful of dollars.
President John Fitzgerald Kennedy, assassinated on 22 November 1963, stands out in the political world during this decade. Martin Luther King, advocate of civil rights, also assassinated, and Lyndon B. Johnson, 36th president of the U.S.A.
The Space Race between the United States of America and the Soviet Union dominated in the early 1960s. The first man in space, Jurij Gagarin, was launched on April 12, 1961 on the Vostok 1. On July 20, 1969, the first landing of the human being took place. The first mission was the Apollo 11 commanded by the famous Neil Armstrong.
In 1962 Watson, Crick and Wilkins won the Nobel Prize in Medicine for their discovery of the double helix structure of DNA.
On July 25, 1967, the first heart transplant was performed by Christiaan Barnard in South Africa.
Also in 1967, scientists Morgan and McKenzie developed the theory of plate tectonics.
This decade is full of innovations such as the first computer video game invented in 1962 called Spacewar! (see Video games in the 1960s), the Dual-tone multi-frequency for phones, Sketchpad one of the first programs used in computer graphics, the mouse, the first Floppy disk in 1967, the first cassette recorders (the first audio cassette was presented by Philips at the end of 1962) and video recorders, the first automatic cash withdrawals in banks, the introduction of the Basic programming language in 1966 and much more.
In 1960 the American radio network KDKA-FM performs the first transmissions in frequency modulation. In the same year the first laser is built.
In 1969 ARPANET was established, the network of the United States Department of Defense, an embryo of the Internet.
On May 8, the last album of The Beatles was released, which in fact melted: Let It Be.
On 21 June, the Brazilian national football team Pelé won the 1970 World Cup, in the final against Italy's national football team.
Jimi Hendrix, a world-famous American guitarist and singer-songwriter, died on September 18.
On October 4, Janis Joplin, American singer, died.
On October 5, the album Led Zeppelin III was released.
On November 13, Hafiz al-Asad came to power in Syria following a military coup.
German Chancellor Willy Brandt launched a policy of opening up Eastern Europe, recognizing the German Democratic Republic and signing a treaty of friendship with Poland.
Terrorist attacks and urban guerrillas between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland urge the British government to take very hard measures, but many accuse the British of striking only the Irish population.
The government of Libya, led by Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi, expels Italians from the country.
Commercial flights start with the Boeing 747 aircraft.
On January 25, Idi Amin Dada came to power in Uganda.
The tragedy of Sojuz 11 took place on 30 June
On July 3, the American poet/singer Jim Morrison died in Paris.
On August 2nd, "Who's Next" is released, the fifth studio album by British rock band The Who.
On August 28, a few miles off Monopoli (BA), due to a gas leak, ship Heleanna was shipwrecked with 1174 passengers on board: in the end there will be 20 dead, 39 missing and 270 injured.
China is admitted to the UN on 25 October.
On 29 December the Christian Democrat Giovanni Leone was elected sixth President of the Italian Republic.
Intel builds the 4004 designed by Federico Faggin, the first microprocessor in history.
US President Richard Nixon puts an end to the convertibility of the US dollar with gold.
On October 31, Pink Floyd released the album Meddle.
On November 8, the Led Zeppelin released the album Led Zeppelin IV
On January 30 in Derry, Northern Ireland, British parades open fire killing 14 people during a peaceful human rights demonstration: it is Bloody Sunday.
On May 31, a car bomb explodes near Peteano, hamlet of Sagrado, in the province of Gorizia, killing three carabinieri and wounding two more. For the massacre of Peteano were condemned Vincenzo Vinciguerra and Carlo Cicuttini (exponents of Avanguardia Nazionale and Ordine Nuovo).
On September 5, at the Munich Olympics, a commando of Palestinian terrorists from Black September killed eleven Israeli athletes and a German policeman after a failed attempted kidnapping.
On 21 December, after a series of bilateral meetings, the parliaments of the German and West Democratic Republic approved the fundamental treaty establishing mutual recognition.
The SALT 1 agreements for the reduction of weapons of mass destruction are signed between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Richard Nixon announces the development of the Space Shuttle space program.
Magnavox Odyssey, the world's first video game console, and Pong, begins the era of video games as a mass cultural and commercial phenomenon.
In Italy, conscientious objection to military service is recognized.
On January 14, Elvis Presley performed in his famous Aloha from Hawaii, the first live concert broadcasted in the world. Elvis' performance was seen by about a billion people.
On May 17, the anarchist Gianfranco Bertoli launched a hand bomb during a ceremony in front of the police station in Milan to strike the then minister Mariano Rumor: four people were killed while forty-five others were injured.
On July 20, Bruce Lee died after taking a tablet of Equagesic: he fell asleep without waking up.
On 11 September, with the support of the United States, a coup d'état in Chile overthrows the socialist government of President Salvador Allende and establishes the terrible military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet.
The United States of America withdraws troops from Vietnam.
The war of Kippur explodes in the Middle East; OPEC decides, in protest against the West supporting Israel, to raise oil prices causing a global energy crisis.
The Australian AC/DC band, symbol of rock music, is born.
Queen, the band's first album, is released.
On 25 April, a non-violent military coup of leftist forces led to the fall in Portugal of the fascist dictatorship of Marcelo Caetano, established in 1926 by António de Oliveira Salazar: the following year democracy was restored by electing a Constitutional Assembly and independence was granted to the overseas territories, such as Angola and Mozambique, while the first free elections after the regime took place in 1976.
On May 28 a bomb hidden in a garbage bin explodes during a trade unionist demonstration in the central square of the Loggia in Brescia: eight people are killed while one hundred and two are the wounded; this massacre will be attributed to exponents of the New Order.
On July 1, Argentina's general and politician Juan Domingo Perón, founder of the Justicalist Party in 1947, died in Olivos, and his place was taken by his third wife Isabelita Perón.
On 7 July, West Germany won the 1974 World Football Championship in the final against the Netherlands by Johan Cruijff
On August 4, a bomb explodes on a carriage of the Italicus train at the exit of the Grande Galleria dell'Appennino near San Benedetto Val di Sambro, in the province of Bologna: the attack causes twelve victims and about forty wounded and is claimed by the neo-fascist group Black Order.
On August 9, President Richard Nixon resigned as a result of the Watergate scandal.
On 17 November, the democratic elections in Greece were held which brought an end to the dictatorship of the colonels and began a process of democratization called Metapolitefsi: the moderate New Democracy Party of Kōnstantinos Karamanlīs won.
On November 30, in Ethiopia, a group of paleontologists discovered fossil remains of a female specimen of Australopithecus afarensis, whom they will call Lucy.
The construction by the military of the famous Romanian mountain road Transfăgărășan DN7C is completed.
The Palestine Liberation Organization is admitted to the UN as an observer member as a representative of the Palestinian people.
ABBA wins the Eurovision Song Contest with the track Waterloo, thus starting their worldwide success.
On February 24, the album Physical Graffiti by Led Zeppelin was released.
Microsoft was founded on 4 April
On 13 April a civil war broke out in Lebanon between Maronite Christians and the Muslim minority which ended in 1990.
On April 30, the Vietnam War ended with the entry of the North Vietnamese army into Saigon, later renamed Ho Chi Minh City by the Communist regime.
On October 31st, Queen's single Bohemian Rhapsody was released.
On 20 November, after thirty-six years of dictatorship in Spain, General Francisco Franco died: King Juan Carlos of Bourbon, appointed by Franco himself in 1969, was brought to the throne and immediately began a process of democratization of the Spanish Transitional Country.
As a result of a confused application of the laws on the radio and television system, around the middle of the decade the first private radio and televisions are born in Italy; the movement of the "free radio" is formed, radio stations created mostly by young people, whose most striking case is that of Bolognese Radio Alice.
On 24 March Jorge Rafael Videla carried out a military coup in Argentina by overthrowing the democratically elected Isabelita Peron, the third wife of the Argentine politician and general Juan Domingo Perón; he will also be responsible for the disappearance of the so-called "desaparecidos" and for torture and killing of political opponents.
On 20 June the general elections took place in Italy, where, in a context of historical compromise between the DC and PCI, the possible overtaking of the second party on the first one took place for the first time since the end of the 1940s.
On 9 September Mao Zedong died and in China there was a struggle for power on the part of the "Four Band."
On 22 October, the Led Zeppelin's film concert from the album The Song Remains the Same was released at the cinema and in stores.
The Concorde is on duty.
Construction of the Enterprise, first prototype of Space Shuttle.
On December 8, the Eagles released the well-known album "Hotel California."
On January 23, the Pink Floyd's Animals album was released.
On May 25, the first film of the Saga Guerre stellari is released: the homonymous film.
On 15 June Spain held the first general elections for a Constituent after the end of the Franco dictatorship which marked a victory of the centrist parties during the so-called Spanish Transition.
On July 14, in New York City, there was a blackout after lightning caused a failure at the power plant.
On August 16 he died in Graceland, only 42 years old, Elvis Presley, legend and king of rock music.
In Tenerife, two Boeing 747s clash on the runway of the airport causing 583 victims and at the same time the most serious disaster in aviation history, in what passed to history as the Tenerife air disaster.
Ascended to the general public of music and punk fashion.
Ascended to the general public of disco music and the modern concept of disco. The success of the film The fever of Saturday evening is the confirmation. The film launches John Travolta.
Two of the first space probes named Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 are sent.
On 13 May in Italy the Basic Law was enacted, which reform psychiatric hospitals.
On March 16 in via Fani in Rome a commando of the Red Brigades kidnapped Aldo Moro, president of Christian Democracy and killed the five men of his escort.
On May 9, Moro's lifeless body was found in the trunk of a red Renault 4 in Via Caetani, halfway between the national offices of PCI and DC; the same day he was killed by the Sicilian mafia Peppino Impastato, radio conductor who had the courage to challenge among others his cousin Gaetano Badalamenti.
June 25: Argentina wins the home football world championship and wins its first title.
On 8 July following the resignation of Giovanni Leone, socialist Sandro Pertini, partisan during the Resistance, became the seventh President of the Italian Republic.
On August 6, Pope Paul VI died: on August 26, John Paul I succeeded him, but he died after only thirty-three days of pontificate; on October 16, Polish Cardinal Karol Wojtyła, John Paul II, was elected Pope, leaving a deep trace in the history of the twentieth century, with a pontificate 27 years long.
On 17 September, the Camp David agreements between Israel and Egypt opened a new phase in the Middle East conflict.
Steve Jobs and Edwin Catmull founded the Pixar Animation Studios, the first company to deal with high-level graphics computers.
Jazz is released, Queen's album
On 11 April, following the war between Uganda and Tanzania over conflicts over disputed borders, Ugandan dictator Idi Amin Dada was deposed.
Margaret Thatcher and Maria de Lourdes Pintasilgo are elected Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (since 4 May) and Portugal (since 1 August): they are the first women in Europe to lead a government.
From 7 to 10 June the European Parliament was elected for the first time: the relative majority party is the Party of European Socialism.
On July 17, Nicaragua's dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle was deposed and the Sandinists took power.
On November 30, Pink Floyd released the album The Wall.
On 15 December, the Third RAI Network and also the Tg3 were born.
On December 24, the USSR invaded Afghanistan to the rescue of the socialist regime of Nur Mohammad Taraki, established the previous year in a bloody coup called the Saur Revolution.
The second oil energy crisis of the seventies of the twentieth century broke out.
In February in Iran the Shah is deposed and a rigid Shiite Islamic Republic is established in the country voted by referendum on 1 April and led by the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeyni, declared Supreme Leader in December.
Islamic students occupy the American embassy in Tehran: the US government accuses the new Islamic republic and breaks diplomatic relations.
Philips and Sony invent the compact disc: the CD was born.
Sony invents and launches the Walkman on the market.
The smallpox virus is declared extinct.
The decade of the 1970s saw significant changes in television programming in both the United Kingdom and the United States. Famous family sitcoms and television programmes oriented to contemporary and socially younger shows, fashionable and urban, especially in the United States, are beginning to be broadcast. In Italy the first local and private television networks are born and since 1977 the broadcasts start to be broadcast in color, while in 1979 the third public channel called Rai 3 is born.
The early 1970s saw the birth of numerous derivative rock genres (soft rock, pop rock, hard rock), with internationally renowned artists such as The Who, Queen, Genesis, Scorpions, Bruce Springsteen, Fleetwood Mac, The Carpenters, Elton John, David Bowie, Carly Simon, Carole King, James Taylor, John Denver, Rod Stewart, Eagles, America, Chicago, The Doobie Brothers, Paul McCartney and Steely Dan and the birth of the heavy metal genre represented mainly by bands such as Deep Purple, Black Sabbath and Led Zeppelin, as well as the further growth of the rhythm and blues genre (R&B) of artists such as the multi-instrumentalist Stevie Wonder and the quintet popular music The Jackson 5. The second half of 1970s also saw the birth of the disco and discoteche, which dominated during the second half of its decade with bands such as the Bee Pleas, ABBA.
In 1970 the Beatles were dissolved, whose members would embark on their respective solo careers.
On September 18, 1970, guitarist and singer Jimi Hendrix died.
Jim Morrison, leader and singer of The Doors, died on July 3, 1971.
On March 1, 1973, Pink Floyd released The Dark Side of the Moon, their most successful album, which with over 50 million copies sold is considered one of the most important albums in the history of music. In the same year, AC/DC and Kiss were born.
In 1975 Sex Pistols were born and will be recognized as one of the most influential bands for the advent of Punk-Rock music.
In 1976 the U2s were born. Also in the same year the Deep Purples, after the death of guitarist Tommy Bolin, separated to gather, then in 1984, while the Eagles publish their first collection Their Greatest Hits (1971-1975) which in the future will become the best-selling album in the United States (33 million copies) and one of the best-selling (over 42 million).
On August 16, 1977, the singer and actor Elvis Presley died.
In 1977 the Dire Straits were born, founded by leader and guitarist Mark Knopfler and the Police were formed in the same year.
In 1978 the Duran Duran were born followed a year later by Spandau Ballet which will be considered the rivals of the advent in those years of new wave and new romantic music.
In 1979, the leader and singer Ozzy Osbourne left Black Sabbath to pursue his solo career; in the same year they debuted the Iron Maiden with the release of their first EP The Soundhouse Tapes. Michael Jackson also released Off the Wall, considered by many as the first real album of the King of Pop.
Many are the most successful singers in Italy of the decade (many of which were already established in the 1960s), among the many are Fabrizio De André, Lucio Battisti, Lucio Dalla, Renato Zero, Mina, Edoardo Bennato, Mia Martini, Francesco De Gregori, Francesco Guccini, Gianni Morandi, Patty Pravo, Adriano Celentano, Antonello Venditti, Riccardo Cocciante, Raffaella Carrà, Loredana Bertè, Claudio Baglioni, Fred Bongusto, Rino Gaetano, Mino Reitano, Vasco Rossi, Peppino Di Capri, Franco Battiato, Pino Daniele, Marcella Bella, Al Bano, Mango and many others. Among the groups are Matia Bazar, Nomadi, Banco del Mutuo Soccorso, Premiata Forneria Marconi, Delirium, Cugini di Campagna and others.
During the seventies the revolution of the New Hollywood with young filmmakers continued. The first films at the Top were The Shark (1975) that inaugurated the era of the Cup of the cinema (together with the definition of the term "blockbuster"), although it was eclipsed two years later by the sci-fi film Star Wars in 1977. The fever of Saturday evening (1977) triggered the disco mania in the United States. The godfather in 1972 was one of the greatest successes of the decade, as well as his first sequel, The godfather - Part II, of 1974. The films of this decade, begin to be increasingly of fantastic genre, action, horror and begin the first sagas or sequels. The films that have had more and more success and social impact, with Oscar Awards were:
Saturday's Fever Evening
In Hong Kong's cinema, the overwhelming success of Bruce Lee's films throughout the world is a pioneer, even after his disappearance, to the increasing audience of Kung-fu's films (of which towards the end of the decade a subgenre of comedy will be established, which launches other new stars like Jackie Chan)
Italian cinema sees the affirmation and prevalence of so-called "Poliziotteschi" films while, in the genre comedy, of the proline of sexy comedy, whose symbolic actors are Lino Banfi and Edwige Fenech. Also in the comedy debuts the most famous character of Paolo Villaggio, Fantozzi. Commissioni with the comedy you also have in the policeman, as in the series of Piedone, played by Bud Spencer, at the time already famous for the films in pairs with Terence Hill, or in that of Nico Giraldi, played by Tomas Milian.
There was an energy crisis in 1973 following the Kippur War, and a second such crisis in 1979 after the Iranian Revolution.
The German Chancellor Willy Brandt establishes a policy of rapprochement with East Germany and other Eastern bloc countries, known as Ostpolitik.
Fall of fascist regimes in the Iberian Peninsula: in Spain with the death of Francisco Franco, in Portugal with the Carnation Revolution, ending also the war of independence in its colonies in Africa.
Under the secretariat of Enrico Berlinguer, the PCI, like other European communist parties, undertook the Euro-Communist path, marked by the detachment from that of the Eastern bloc and also by a zero tolerance towards the left-wing armed groups, achieving important results in the 1975 regional elections and the 1976 general elections.
New bloody regimes are being established in Latin America: on September 11, 1973, Augusto Pinochet took power in Chile; in 1976, in Argentina, the military junta presided over by Videla.
In Nicaragua in 1979 the Sandinist struggle with the overthrow of Somoza was successful.
Following the flood (which took place on 20 July 1969) and the advances in twentieth century science and technology, hopes (already born in the previous decades) that man would soon begin to travel and conquer space were raised and strengthened. At that time there was a general optimism and a vision of the future characterized by technological advances aimed at colonization and the journey into space, so much so that people used to fantasize about the possibility of making a journey into space in a very near future. Such expectations were considered by many rather realistic and would continue even in the eighties of the twentieth century, and then gradually fade away from the nineties. The vision of the future of the seventies and, in general, of the twentieth century had predicted the voyages into space, but it had not been possible to foresee the advent of the Internet, mobile telephony and digital revolution individually and in a successful way.
Among the most noteworthy advances are:
Moon Exploration: sending the first automatic probe to the lunar ground, Moon 16, with the mechanical collection of rock samples, and Moon 17, with the first use of automated rover; last human missions of the Apollo program.
On 17 July 1975 the Apollo-Sojuz Test Programme was launched, the first space cooperation between the USA and the USSR.
The Viking program is born, with the sending of a probe to Mars
The Voyager Program is born, and the two probes called Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 are sent into space; both, still operating for the next many years and directed beyond the limits of the solar system, carrying a disc with images and sounds of the Earth destined to possible extraterrestrial civilizations
In 1978 Louise Brown, the first human being conceived in test tube, was born.
First use of cyclotron in cancer treatment in Britain in 1973
The 1970s are the decade of the birth of modern Computers. IBM produces the first floppy disks in 1970. The world's first general microprocessor was the Intel 4004, released in 1971, while the first real personal computer, the Commodore PET, was marketed in 1977. The first electronic calculators started to be produced on a large international scale, while in 1978 transistors were replaced with integrated circuits.
Revolution in the audiovisual industry: in 1970 Sony presented the first videotape, U-matic, and Philips produced in 1972 the first home video recorder. Sony also invented the first Walkman in 1979.
It begins to be popular the arcade video game with video games like Pong, Space Invaders, Defender, Asteroids and Pac-Man.
Email is born: in 1971 sent the first message.
Giulio Andreotti, President of the Council (1972-1973; 1976-1979)
Enrico Berlinguer, Secretary-General of the PCI
Giovanni Leone, President of the Italian Republic (1971 - 1978)
Aldo Moro, President of the Council (1974 - 1976) and victim of the Red Brigades
Sandro Pertini, President of the Italian Republic (1978 - 1985)
Mariano Rumor, President of the Council (1973 - 1974)
Richard Nixon, 37th President of the United States.
Gerald Ford, 38th President of the United States.
Jimmy Carter, 39th President of the United States.
Augusto Pinochet, President of Chile
Mao Tse-tung, President of the People's Republic of China
Kim Il-sung, President of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Hafiz al-Assad, President of Syria
Mu'ammar Gaddafi, President of Libya
Yasser Arafat, President of the Palestinian National Authority
Bruce Lee, Actor and Martial Artist.
Pope John Paul I, Pope.
Pope John Paul II, Pope.
Idi Amin Dada, dictator of Uganda
Diego Giachetti, no one can judge us, the years of the revolt against women.
Marina D'Amato, The TV of the boys: stories, myths, heroes.
Mattia's Alina, it was the kids' TV years... the stars' children and the '70s.
Silvana Sola and Paola Vassalli, I nostri anni '70. Books for boys in Italy.
The United States breaks diplomatic relations with Iran, imposing the total embargo on the country which, from the year before, has become an Islamic republic.
Republican candidate Ronald Reagan wins presidential elections in the United States.
On May 4, Tito died, a Yugoslav dictator in office since 1953.
On June 27, a plane of the Italian company Itavia crashes near Ustica. The plane, directed from Bologna to Palermo with 81 people on board between passengers and crew, explodes in flight. There are no survivors. It is assumed that he was hit by a missile, but the reasons for the disaster will never be clarified.
On August 2, a bomb exploded at Bologna station causing the death of 85 people and causing more than 200 wounded; the massacre of Bologna is the most serious attack in the Republican history of Italy. It is thought that the senders and the performers belonged to extreme right groups (NAR), but there were also attempts to throw off the investigations organized by the summits of SISMI, including General Pietro Musumeci and Colonel Giuseppe Belmonte (affiliated to the loggia P2 by Licio Gelli).
The Polish independent union Solidarność, led by Lech Wałęsa, proclaims a series of strikes in the shipyards of Gdansk, which soon extend to the whole country.
In September the tension between Iran and Iraq for the control of some border oil wells degenerates into open war.
On 23 November an earthquake hits Irpinia: at 19:34 a shock of 6,9 on the magnitude equal to the X degree Mercalli causes about deaths, wounded, displaced and incalculable damage between Campania and Basilicata.
On March 30 in Washington, Ronald Reagan is the victim of an attack by 25-year-old John Hinckley Jr., a mythomaniac who shoots the president of the United States to attract the attention of the young actress Jodie Foster of whom he is infatuated; Reagan will be saved after a long surgical operation.
On May 13 Pope John Paul II was wounded in an attack in St. Peter's Square by the Turk Mehmet Ali Ağca, a militant of the extreme right wing group of grey wolves. Ağca will be subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment by the Italian judiciary, but the causes of the attack will remain for a long time subject of judicial and journalistic inquiry: among the perpetrators of the attempted assassination will also be suspected the Bulgarians of the KDS on commission of the Soviet KGB.
In Italy the scandal of the secret Masonic lodge P2 by Licio Gelli breaks out. In the lists of affiliates are discovered influential names of Italian public life. The scandal will lead to the resignation of the government Forlani.
In Poland, General Wojciech Jaruzelski becomes Prime Minister and in an attempt to prevent a Soviet invasion he negotiates a trade union truce with Solidarność.
Israel conquers the Golan Heights from Syria.
A commando of Palestinian terrorists of al-Fath carries out an attack on the major Jewish temple of Rome, following which a two-year-old dies and many other Roman Jews are injured.
In Geneva negotiations between the USA and the USSR for strategic missile control and reduction begin.
In Poland the Solidarność Union is declared illegal.
Israel invades Lebanon and occupies the southern part of it. As a result of the invasion, Palestinian leader Arafat and the PLO's entire staff are forced to leave the country and take refuge in Tunis. A long civil war begins in Lebanon.
Between 6 a.m. on 16 and 8 a.m. on 18 September 1982, the Lebanese Falangi and the Southern Lebanon Army, with the complicity of the Israeli army, carry out a massacre in the Sabra district and in the Shatila refugee camp. In this massacre a number of civilians between 762 and , mainly Palestinians and Lebanese Shiites are killed.
The Argentine military dictatorship sends its army to occupy the Falkland Islands, an overseas British territory that Argentina has claimed for years. The United Kingdom, at the hands of its then Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, reacts militarily and after a war lasting two and a half months resumes the sovereignty of the islands. After this military defeat the Argentine dictatorship enters into a crisis of consensus and a few months later falls, opening the way to free elections.
Grace Kelly dies in a car accident.
Northern Cyprus declares its independence, recognised only by Turkey.
Margaret Thatcher is re-elected British Premier.
Socialist Bettino Craxi becomes the second non-democratic politician (after the Republican Giovanni Spadolini) to lead the government in the history of Republican Italy.
The Nintendo Entertainment System comes out, considered the system that raised and revolutionized the video game industry, and titles such as Super Mario Bros., Super Mario Bros. 3, The Legend of Zelda, Excitebike, Metroid and Castlevania soon make history.
On 7 May in Rome Mirella Gregori, 15-year-old student, disappeared.
On 22 June, again in Rome, Emanuela Orlandi disappears, 15-year-old Vatican town whose case is connected both to the disappearance of his peer Mirella Gregori and to the attack on the pope two years earlier. Both disappearances will remain unsolved cases.
On September 27, Richard Stallman launched the GNU project for the creation of the first Unix-like operating system entirely composed of free software.
23 October: in a two suicide attacks against the peace forces in Lebanon 299 US and French soldiers and 6 civilians die.
25 October: Operation Urgent Fury, US special forces invade Grenada and repress the possible establishment of a pro-communist government.
The first free elections are held in Argentina after almost six years of military dictatorship. The new President Raúl Alfonsín promises the condemnation of the military who violated human rights.
Massive protests by British miners against the closure of coal mines.
International forces are leaving Lebanon.
The Soviet Union and its satellite countries boycott the Los Angeles Olympics in protest.
In Padua, during his rally, he was struck by a stroke Enrico Berlinguer Secretary General of the Italian Communist Party.
October 31: Prime Minister Indira Gandhi is killed in India; her son is succeeded.
In November Ronald Reagan was re-elected president of the United States.
Chemical disaster in Bhopal, India.
Mikhail Gorbačëv was elected Secretary General of the PCUS. Afterwards he proved to be the last to hold this post, except for the brief mandate of his successor Vladimir Ivaško (5 days in 1991).
The new secretary of PCUS Mikhail Gorbačëv meets in Geneva with US President Ronald Reagan for a summit on arms reduction.
In South Africa the repression resulting from the apartheid regime causes hundreds of black victims. The protests, led by Nelson Mandela's African National Congress, call for more rights and freedoms. The United States and the European Economic Community impose economic sanctions on South Africans.
The Nintendo Entertainment System is released in the United States after its success in Japan.
29 May. At the Heysel Stadium in Brussels, where the final of the European Cup of Football Champions was taking place between the , a massacre takes place: due to the charge of some British thugs, a group of Italians are crowded on a containment wall of a sector of the stadium that collapses, causing the fall to the ground from about ten meters of height of a hundred people. Of them, 39 find death, but for reasons of public order the game will be played the same. Following this incident, UEFA will disqualify the English clubs from its competitions for 5 years (the Liverpool for six) and, due to the inefficiency demonstrated by its police forces, Belgium will no longer be entrusted with the organization of international meetings until 2000.
On 19 July, General Jaruzelski took office as President of the State Council of Poland.
On September 1st, Robert Ballard found the wreck of the Titanic.
During the Tour de Corse the Rally Champion Attilio Bettega dies aboard the Lancia Rally 037.
During an English Third Division race between Bradford City and Lincoln City, the Valley Parade Stadium is set on fire because of a cigarette butt left lit in one of the stadium sectors: 56 deaths and 265 wounded in one of the most serious disasters until then of British football.
In February, Gorbačëv announced the "perestroika," a program for radical renewal of the Soviet economy and society.
In March, the first cases of serious intoxication of what will burst as a wine scandal to methanol in Italy begin.
On 26 April a nuclear reactor explodes in Černobyl. In the surrounding areas the disaster causes thousands of deaths directly or indirectly linked to radiation, as well as very heavy damage to the economy and agriculture. In the following months the "radioactive cloud" invades the whole of Europe.
A new meeting between Reagan and Gorbačëv takes place in Reykjavik in October.
In Assisi, on October 27, an interreligious meeting is held promoted by Pope John Paul II, to which several religious leaders adhere to pray for peace.
The Nintendo Entertainment System debuts in Europe and the rest of the world.
In November, the Irangate scandal broke out that caused the Reagan Presidency to go down: despite the total embargo, arms would be sold to Iran with the complicity of high American politicians.
The tension between Libya and the United States is growing; in March the air forces of the two countries clash in the Gulf of Sirte and in April the Americans bomb Tripoli for retaliation.
During the Tour de Corse the champion of Rally Henri Toivonen and his navigator Sergio Cresto aboard the Lancia Delta S4. This tragedy will be the end of Group B.
The Conservative Party wins the elections in the United Kingdom and Margaret Thatcher is awarded the position of Premier for the third time in a row
In Geneva, the USA and the USSR sign a historic treaty for the reduction of nuclear arsenals and the destruction of Euro-missiles.
Gorbačëv proposes the glasnost with the democratic opening of the Soviet Union and the reform of the PCUS.
U.S. scientists discover an ozone hole over Antarctica with worrying dimensions.
The Soviet Union is shaken by the autonomyist and nationalist forces of its constituent republics.
The Soviet Union withdraws from Afghanistan after eight years of war.
Historic meeting in Moscow between Reagan and Gorbačëv. The relations between the two superpowers begin to relax.
George Bush is elected President of the United States of America.
It explodes in the skies of Lockerbie, Scotland an American airliner. The cause is an attack. The Reagan government accuses Libya.
After nine years, the war between Iran and Iraq, following the acceptance of the ceasefire, proposed by the UN, has ended, with millions of dollars of damage and more than one million victims, while both countries proclaim themselves winners.
Chilean President Augusto Pinochet was defeated in a popular referendum, but remained president of the republic until 1990 and commander of the army.
In Beijing, the peaceful protest in Tiananmen Square is repressed in blood, demanding democracy and freedom. It stirs up the heroism and determination of the young man who, without weapons, places himself in front of a column of tanks and forces them to stop.
The Red Army is withdrawn from the USSR satellite countries and in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Poland communist regimes fall and the first free elections are held. In Poland it wins Solidarność by a large majority.
On 9 November the Berlin Wall, considered the symbol of the Cold War, was demolished, which is now considered historically over. East Germany also begins negotiations to reunite with the Federal Republic in the West.
In Bulgaria and Romania there are clashes between army and protesters demanding the resignation of communist governments and free elections, as happened in other countries of the former Communist bloc. Between November and December there are thousands of deaths throughout Romania but on Christmas day Ceaușescu is captured and shot.
Free elections take place in Chile after sixteen years of dictatorship; the Socialist and Christian Democrat parties win.
On December 20, the United States invaded Panama, laying down dictator Manuel Noriega.
Freon gases from spray cans are banned, which are considered to be responsible for thinning the Earth's ozone layer to the poles.
For American cinema the decade opens with the end of the New Hollywood, traditionally placed with 1981, the year of release of The Gates of the Sky: the film, one of the biggest financial film failures, will lead to the bankruptcy of the United Artists and will henceforth lead most of the production houses to exclude the final control of the directors on their works in the post-productive phases.
Hollywood action movies know an extraordinary planetary success. The most famous faces of this kind are Arnold Schwarzenegger and Sylvester Stallone.
The new American comedy, launched from the films The Blues Brothers and The Craziest Airplane in the World of 1980, and One armchair for two in 1983.
The war in Vietnam becomes one of the main themes of the US cinema of the second half of the decade. Films such as Born on July 4, Platoon- both of Oliver Stone, himself veteran of Vietnam - and Stanley Kubrick's Full Metal Jacket reflect on the role of the United States in the conflict.
1983 is the year of Scarface written by Oliver Stone and directed by Brian De Palma. Film gangster that marked the film history.
In 1989, after three years of work, Walt Disney returned to the splendour of the past with the feature film La sirenetta; with the success of this work, the animation studio decreed the end of its crisis lasting more than ten years.
Towards the end of the decade, the superhero genre was relaunched at the cinema, already widespread at the beginning of the decade with the saga of Superman with Christopher Reeve. Tim Burton's feature film Batman, released in the summer of 1989, received a huge success of audience and critics and was the first film to exceed $100 million in the first ten days since its release in cinemas.
The technology employed in the post-production phase and therefore in the special effects, undergoes a great development. Computer graphics, with films like Tron (1982), the first film to use CGI extensively in the 80s and first to put live actors in a computer-generated world, makes its official entry into the world of cinema, but will have to wait much longer (1991) to see it applied in long sequences. However, the science fiction genre returns to success, thanks to the works of American directors such as George Lucas, Steven Spielberg and James Cameron, the latter Canadian. The special effects attract the public and also the fantastic genre and horror collect a great consensus (Cameron himself will shoot in 1989 The Abyss, one of the first films to integrate special effects in computer graphics). Many titles, popular success and considered representative of the 80s, belong to these genres:
E.T. the extra-terrestrial - the highest collection at the box office of the 1980s and exceeded only in 1993 by Jurassic Park
Star Wars - The Empire strikes again and Star Wars - The Return of the Jedi
Fantastic/Avventura - The predominant element in many films of this genre is the magic that will be almost completely absent in the productions of the nineties; even many Japanese cartoons broadcast on television will have as heroine protagonists equipped with magical accessories. Among the feature films become classics of the genre:
The predators of the lost ark, Indiana Jones and the cursed temple and Indiana Jones and the last crusade
In the fantastic world of Oz
Even the genre comedy will suffer from the success of the genre fantastic and science fiction; among the most successful titles:
The explosive woman (original Weird Science title)
Who framed Roger Rabbit?
Horror - among the most important of the genre entered the annals of the history of cinema:
In this multiple vein will be the films that will have as protagonists groups of teenagers struggling with maniacs murderers; among the most famous:
Nightmare - From the bottom of the night
In 1980 Umberto Eco published his masterpiece, The name of the rose.
In May 1983, the writer Eugenio Corti published his masterpiece novel, The Red Horse.
In 1984 Milan Kundera published The unbearable lightness of being.
In the music there is a wide use of electronic instruments, including synthpop and New waves, which have as the first real creators of this new genre Duran Duran, Spandau Ballet, Depeche Mode, New Order and Pet Shop Boys. Other successful groups in the decade will also be Queen, Police, Bon Jovi, Guns N' Roses, Van Halen, Motley Crue and U2. In the urban suburbs of the United States develops the hip hop and rap culture, which will be considered with increasing attention, and then become an extremely popular genre in the following decades. Thanks to two consecutive albums among the most sold in musical history (and the most sold history of the decade) Thriller and Bad, Michael Jackson, who from this decade will also be called the "King of the Pop," became the most sold artist of the decade. Jackson has sold over one billion albums in the world and is considered the best-selling friend of the male artist, the best-selling artist of his female record.
In 1980 Iron Maiden, the first album of the same band, was released. On February 19 of the same year, Bon Scott, AC/DC singer, died, and on July 31, he was released Back in Black, in memory of the previous singer. On September 25, John Bonham, Led Zeppelin's drummer, died. On December 8, the former Beatle John Lennon, spiritual leader of pacifism and the movement against the war in Vietnam, was assassinated in New York by Mark David Chapman, who exploded against five gunshots. On October 20, Boy, the first U2 album, was released.
In 1981 the MTV cable television network was launched in the United States, which later became very influential in the musical show business. As a result, music videos were released in Los Angeles. Motley Crue formed and released the debut album Too fast for love, creating the Hair metal, subgenre of heavy metal that will make the fortune of many groups. The album Greatest Hits dei Queen, the official collection of some of the group's most popular songs, sold over 30 million copies. Bob Marley died in Miami hospital on 11 May 1981 due to a skin cancer, spread to the brain. On 28 October, the Metallica formed by an announcement in a newspaper and the agreement between James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich, the band became one of the most successful bands in the history of heavy metal and contemporary rock.
In 1982 Thriller was released, the sixth studio album by Michael Jackson. It was certified as the best-selling album of all time, having passed (unique in history) the 100 million copies.
Also in 1982 the last studio album by Led Zeppelin: Coda was released. The film by Alan Parker Pink Floyd The Wall, based on the concept of the homonymous album by Pink Floyd. The French Rockets released the album Atomic, the last with the classical formation and the showy spatial costumes and the silvery wax. The Number of the Beast, the first album by Iron Maiden with Bruce Dickinson on vocals, was released. Finally, ABBA officially dissolved on December 11th.
In 1983 Kill 'Em All, the first studio album by Metallica, considered by many critics as one of the most important and influential of heavy metal music and rock in general, released the album Synchronicity, the last of the Police who reached the first position in the standings thanks to the hit Every Breath You Take. In the same year comes War of the U2, record that will become among the milestones of music of the 80s and pop-rock, thanks to the hit Sunday Bloody Sunday and New Year's Day. Also in the same year Murmur, the first album by R.E.M. that gets a discreet success being elected as an album of the year, and the single Everything Counts by Depeche Mode. Finally, the Quiet Riot publish Metal Health, L'album has passed to history as the first album in the history of heavy metal to have conquered the first position in the charts of Billboard.
In 1984 Bruce Springsteen released the album Born in the U.S.A., which runs around the world with millions of copies sold, is the consecration of the "BOSS." Van Halen published 1984 and became famous worldwide thanks to the hits Jump and Panama. In November the album Reckless of Bryan Adams was released, all his 6 singles entered the top 15 of the Billboard hot 100, only Thriller and Born in the U.S.A. had succeeded previously. Also in November Madonna publishes Like in Virgin, unleashing one of the greatest phenomena of adolescent emulation in the history of music around the world.
In 1985 he released We Are the World, written by Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie and performed by 45 mostly American singers, under the name of USA for Africa, one of the most famous charity singles, whose proceeds were donated to the fight against famine in Ethiopia. In May comes out the album Brothers in Arms of the Dire Straits that with over 30 million copies sold will become one of the most sold records of modern music; the album was one of the first records to be printed on CD and the most sold of the eighties in the UK. On July 13 of the same year the Live Aid takes place, with two concerts simultaneously at the JFK stadium in Philadelphia and at the Wembley stadium in London. In the same year Roger Waters abandons the Pink Floyd to focus on his solo career; Freddie Mercury publishes publishes his first solo album, Mr. Bad Guy.
In 1986, the band's third studio album, "Master of Puppets," was released, according to many of the band's best-selling albums. Bon Jovi released their best-selling album, Slippery When Wet, which brought the current Hair metal to the world record. The Final Countdown of Europe was also released in the same period. On August 9, Queen performed in their last full concert, with Freddie Mercury, in Knebworth.
In 1987 the Pink Floyd come back to the fore after the split with bassist Roger Waters with a new album called A Momentary Lapse of Reason, and with a new world tour lasting three years, with the lead guitarist David Gilmour, who will culminate with two great events broadcast live in the world: Pink Floyd Live in Venice, and the great concert in Knebworth Park. Coming out Bad, album by Michael Jackson, Hysteria of the Def Leppard and The Joshua Tree of the U2, which thanks to numerous hits, including With or without you and Where the streets have no name, becomes one of the most successful records in modern music, with over 28 million copies sold. The Depeche jode publish the album Music for the masses, which will become an important milestone of the pop and synth-pop music. The same year Scott La Rock, the best singles of the albums, the Depeche jodes publish the albums for the first albums, the albums being killed in the first albums, will become an important milestone of pop and synth.
On September 4, 1987, at the Turin Stadium, the second-to-last show of Madonna's Who's That Girl Tour was broadcast live on Rai 1, with an average of 14,084,000 viewers, ranked third among the most popular television shows in Italy in 1987.
On September 12, 1987, the first Michael Jackson solo tour, Bad World Tour, began in Tokyo, which ended in January 1989 in Los Angeles after a total of 123 concerts in 15 countries, recording more than 4.4 million spectators and receipts over $125 million, which made it the most successful tour in the history of music at the time.
In 1988 the Bon Jovi's New Jersey album was released, and it was an immediate commercial success since it debuted at number 8 on the Billboard 200, where it reached first place the following week, staying there for four consecutive weeks.
In 1989 they debuted the Skid Row with the album of the same name and immediately achieved a great success thanks to songs like Big Guns, Remember you and 18 and life. Released by Dr. Feelgood by Motley Crue, The Miracle by Queen and Bleach, first album by Nirvana
Costume and mass culture
After the years of lead that had preceded it, also because of a less felt participation compared to the social and ideological battles perceived as lost, with the new decade it goes away affirming more and more a lifestyle perceived as more frivolous, which has as its objective the individual happiness and pursues the personal affirmation. Judged the decade of reagan hedonism and positive thinking, sees the affirmation of the subculture of young sandwiches, the rock-barock in discos-clubs and jackets with padded straps.
The Masters of the Universe line of toys, Mattel's action figures, are extremely popular throughout the decade, becoming an icon despite the contemporary imposition of electronic entertainment. Other successful toy and franchise lines among children of the 1980s are the Ninja Turtles, Transformers and Ghostbusters while among the girls the My Little Pony, Poochie, She-Ra and the inevitable Barbie.
On television they depopulate series in sitcom style with familiar theme such as My friend Arnold, Casa Keaton, Super Vicky, I Robinson, Parents in blue jeans and ALF.
As in the cinema, science fiction and adventure are also the masters of such successful series as Visitors, Manimal, Ralph supermaxieroe, Supercar and Star Trek: The Next Generation. Magnum, P.I., MacGyver, A-Team and Miami Vice are also included for the police and action genre.
Soap operas, both of American production, such as Dynasty and Dallas, and of South American production, and in this case more properly defined telenovelas, are also popular. On March 23, 1987 Beautiful's first episode was aired in the United States.
Two statesmen symbolizing these years are the Republican President Ronald Reagan and the tory Margaret Thatcher, who govern respectively the USA and the United Kingdom for almost the whole decade. France is all included in Mitterrand's double-seventh, while the Soviet Union records in the second half of the decade the experiment of Mikhail Gorbachev.
The 1980s are the decade of AIDS. Announced in 1981, after a few years the syndrome is declared pandemic.
The Chernobyl disaster, which occurred in 1986, was the most serious incident of its kind in the history of humanity, and strongly influenced the international debate on nuclear energy.
The first artificial heart was implanted in 1982.
In 1984 the Manned Maneuvering Unit was introduced in the field of space explorations.
The first take-off of a Space Shuttle, Columbia, took place on April 12, 1981.
In 1986 the assembly of the Mir, the first orbiting space station, began.
In 1989 Kelly and Fisher built the first Mountain bike.
The offices continue to spread the first personal computers. Apple II, released in 1977, is joined by numerous competitors, the most famous of which is the PC IBM, which is soon imitated, to remember for example the Olivetti M24, which unlike IBM mounted the 8086 processor, the firstborn of the famous x86 series of Intel. Apple responds with various models, the most successful is the Macintosh. In 1985 Microsoft publishes the first version of Windows: Windows 1.0.
The most famous models are the Commodore 64, Amiga, ZX Spectrum, Atari ST, Sinclair ZX81, Commodore VIC-20, Commodore 16. The Commodore 64, presented and then sold in 1982, will become the most sold computer in history, entering the Guinness of the primates with a record of over 17 million sold specimens.
Video games are spread with historical titles such as Pac-man, Donkey Kong and Super Mario Bros.; however, the video game crisis of 1983 will resize the scenario, particularly hitting the United States and the computer games market, making the Japanese industry rise to the domain of the sector.
The magnetic tape supports (VHS for video, Music cassette for audio) are very successful, even in the wake of the Walkman phenomenon.
The optical support technology begins to take its first steps. In 1981 the first Laserdiscs are introduced on the market, a support that, although of considerably higher quality than the VHS, will never have much luck because of the high cost of both the players and the media. 1983 is the year of Compact Disc, which five years later exceeds for the first time the sales of vinyl discs.
In 1987, the Smart Card was introduced.
In protest against the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, fifteen countries boycott the 1980 Moscow Olympics. The opposite situation, on the part of the Eastern bloc, in the Olympics following Los Angeles, which also mark the return of China, absent from the demonstration since 1948.
In July 1981 violent protests in New Zealand against the decision to accept the formation of rugby of the , the Springboks (under international ban because of apartheid), for a tour that included several meetings against local teams and three tests match against the All Blacks; in the last of them, in Auckland, Marx Jones and Grant Cole, at the commands of a small tourist plane, they launched flour bombs on the field to prevent the holding of the meeting, but also previously the protests had distinguished by originality: in Hamilton the invasion of the field of numerous New Zealand fans prevented the development of the game and in Wellington the sowing on the field of four-point nails delayed the beginning. For more than ten years after this episode there were no more meetings at official level between the two federations.
In 1982 he won the World Cup in Spain, winning the third title, while in 1986 he won the World Cup in Mexico, winning his second title. Decisive in the quarterfinals the hand goal of Diego Maradona against the ', politically read as Argentine revenge after the heavy defeat in the Falklands war that had humiliated the national pride of the South American country.
In the 1984-85 and 1986-87 championships, Hellas Verona and their first teams won respectively.
During the 29th Tour de Corse the Rally champion Attilio Bettega died on board the Lancia Rally 037. Following this and other fatal accidents that also involved the public of the races, the FIA in 1986 decided to suspend the Group B races, established only in 1982.
In 1985 the first WrestleMania edition was held.
In 1985 Boris Becker won the Wimbledon tournament, becoming, at 17, the youngest tennis champion.
In May 1986 a New Zealand court ordered the rugby federation to cancel a tour in South Africa because it would have been contrary to the values expressed by the federal statute; the South Africans would then organize a series of meetings with a selection of New Zealand players invited on a personal basis without any connection with their federation (the formation will be known as New Zealand Cavaliers). Some important names such as John Kirwan and David Kirk refuse to take part in the expedition. On the return the New Zealand Rugby Union will impose the resignation from any assignment to the team's companion and will impose the sanction of two international matches on all members of the team, which for many will mean the end of the international career.
May 22, 1987. In Auckland the formations of and get into the field for the first game of the inaugural edition of the World Cup of rugby. Game in the smooth and still permeated of amateurism that for about ten years will reign in the discipline, the competition will become in the course of the editions the most followed event in the world after the Olympics and the World Cup of football.
In 1988 the Formula One Champion Ayrton Senna won his first World Championship with McLaren - Honda.
Forgotten (wiki in the 80s)
1 January: a very long economic crisis begins in Japan.
15 January: The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is set up in Paris.
21 March: Namibia gains independence from South Africa.
May 17: WHO removes homosexuality from the list of mental diseases.
July 8: the western German national team wins the football world championship in Italy, winning the third title.
Nelson Mandela is elected vice president of the African National Congress.
2 August: beginning of the Gulf War (1990-1991). The Iraqi troops led by Saddam Hussein invade Kuwait.
3 October: German reunification, East Germany and West Germany become a single state, with the confluence of the first in the second.
15 October: the Nobel Peace Prize is awarded to Mikhail Gorbačëv.
June 25: A bloody civil war begins in Yugoslavia that will last for four years. Slovenia and Croatia proclaim their independence and Serbian federal troops first invade Slovenia, but they are defeated after a few days, and then Croatia proclaims that it wants to defend the interests of the Serbian minority in the country.
A coup against Mikhail Gorbačëv, the so-called putsch of August, fails in the Soviet Union. The failure of the coup, which intended to restore the old Stalinist system, actually accelerates the process of dissolution of the old USSR. Boris Nikolaevič El'cin leads the reaction and on 12 June he is elected president of Russia. During the year Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Ukraine, Belarus, Armenia, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan proclaim their independence. Mikhail Gorbačëv resigns on 25 December, and the day after the USSR is officially dissolved.
On July 22, Jeffrey Dahmer was arrested, passed to history as "The Milwaukee Cannibal." 15 murders will be attributed to him, for whom he will be sentenced to 15 life sentences, but he has always claimed that the murders were 17. Three years later, Dahmer will be killed in prison by an insane.
On August 30, Mike Powell overcame the world's record of long jumping (running for 23 years) with a size of 8.95 meters.
NATO and the UN are launching measures against Serbia in view of the worsening war in Yugoslavia.
In Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, there are violent clashes even with serious episodes of ethnic cleansing, destroyed cities, massacres of civilians, rapes. Serious damage also artistic, with beautiful cities, heritage of humanity razed to the ground.
In two attacks, Italian anti-mafia judges Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino were killed in Palermo.
In Italy the scandal of clean Hands breaks out, which two years later will cause the disappearance of the main Italian political parties of the post-war period.
An economic and political treaty establishing the European Union was approved in Maastricht on 7 February.
The United Nations is launching an urgent humanitarian aid plan against Somalia, vexed by a long civil war.
25 May - Italy: At the 16th ballot, the Christian Democrat Oscar Luigi Scalfaro was elected President of the Republic.
On November 3rd in the United States the Democratic candidate Bill Clinton was elected president by defeating the outgoing, Republican George H. W. Bush. Clinton represents the so-called "generation of forty-year-olds."
Through a referendum Czechoslovakia undergoes a peaceful secession. The Czech Republic and Slovakia are born.
The agreement between Yasser Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin is reached in Israel.
In South Africa the new Constitution against apartheid is ratified by referendum.
On 24 May Eritrea gained independence from Ethiopia.
With the Washington Declaration, strongly supported by Clinton, Israel and Palestine, they recognize each other. The respective leaders of the two countries, Rabin and Arafat, get the Nobel Peace Prize.
In Cambodia the monarchy is restored with Norodom Sihanouk as king.
In Russia there is a serious constitutional crisis between President Boris Nikolaevič El'cin and the Congress of Deputies, which ended with the intervention of the military and hundreds of dead and wounded.
The IRA announces a historic ceasefire and the opening of negotiations.
March 20: she was killed in an ambush in Mogadishu, Somalia, Tg3 journalist Ilaria Alpi with her cameraman Miran Hrovatin. The Alps were in Somalia to investigate alleged illegal trafficking of toxic waste and weapons that also involved representatives of the Italian secret services.
The genocide perpetrated by the Hutus against the Tutsi minority in Rwanda is taking place, causing more than a million deaths. The intervention a month later of a Tutsi force brings peace back to the country.
Nelson Mandela wins the elections in South Africa, which thus abandons apartheid and becomes the only true democracy in Africa. His aim is to lead the nation towards reconciliation between whites and blacks.
In Italy begins the political career of the communications tycoon Silvio Berlusconi, who in fact makes the country pass from the "First" to the "Second Republic."
July 17: the Brazilian national team wins the football world championship by beating Italy in the United States, winning the fourth title.
Pulp Fiction is released worldwide by Quentin Tarantino, one of the greatest hits in cinema, which affects many later filmmakers.
On December 3, Sony released the first console of the PlayStation series.
In Belarus he was elected president with 82% of the votes Aljassandr Lukašėnka.
The European Economic Community becomes the European Union, which expands with three new states (Austria, Finland, Sweden), while two others (Norway and Switzerland) will not join it following popular referendums.
The situation in Bosnia is falling and the blue helmets manage to evacuate only a part of the Muslim population that risks the extermination by the Serbs. Public opinion in many countries strongly calls for UN intervention and a written on a wall in Sarajevo destroyed "Help to Bosnia now" (Help Bosnia now) becomes the slogan of the protest. American and European mediation succeeds and succeeds in reaching an agreement for peace in Bosnia in November.
NATO intervenes militarily in Bosnia, but the war reaches its peak: the ethnic massacre of Srebrenica and the very hard siege of Sarajevo are consumed with attacks by snipers who have caused many deaths among civilians. Subsequently, NATO violently bombs Serbian positions forcing them to leave Sarajevo.
The Palestinian National Authority, an embryo of a future Palestinian state, is officially established. However, its establishment is severely contested by Palestinian and Israeli extremists. Yitzhak Rabin was murdered in the same period.
A bomb explodes in a federal building in Oklahoma City, the United States. The bombers are two former soldiers who participated in the Gulf War.
It was launched by Sony Computer Entertainment, in Europe and the United States, after PlayStation was commercialized in Japan in late 1994.
A bloody civil war continues in Chechnya between Chechen independenceists and the Russian Federal Army.
In Burundi the Tutsis massacre the Hutus to avenge the Rwandan genocide two years before. The UN leaves the country on April 20.
An IRA attack in Manchester during the European football championships causes two deaths and more than two hundred wounded. The peace process in Northern Ireland is broken.
Many cattle in the United Kingdom are affected by mad cow disease. The European Commission will launch an embargo on British meat.
The TWA 800 flight explodes in flight and crashes in front of the New York coast. All 230 occupants die.
Boris Yeltsin is re-elected president of Russia. In Chechnya the separatists are advancing and the health conditions of Yeltsin are worsening due to heart problems. Defense Minister Aleksandr Lebed tries to take power, but Yeltsin brilliantly overcame a heart surgery ostracises him from the government.
The Olympics in Atlanta ran from a terrorist attack at the Stadium of the city during a rock concert. Two dead and one hundred and fifty wounded.
A coup d'état brings peace to Burundi. Meanwhile Zaire is torn apart by a serious civil war.
In Belgium the case of the "Marcinelle monster," with teenagers kidnapped, raped and murdered, stirs up all over Europe and leads to protest mobilizations by civil society.
Albania falls into a period of chaos when the population turns against the government of President Berisha, who is held responsible for the very serious economic situation. It intervenes a mission of peace, led by Italy, which guarantees order until new elections.
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu authorizes the construction of houses in the eastern part of Jerusalem, controlled by the Palestinian National Authority. Hamas launches the first intifada and also Arafat threatens back actions against Arabs who sell their lands to Israelis.
In the United States, March 26, mass suicide of the Heaven's Gate sect took place, led by Marshall Applewhite.
In the general elections in France and Great Britain where the center-left forces prevail, in particular the socialists and the Labourers of Tony Blair win in Paris and London.
The British domination of Hong Kong ends. The city returns to China after 99 years. In the People's Republic the former president Deng Xiaoping dies, replaced by Jiang Zemin to lead the country.
The IRA once again announces a ceasefire to start negotiations on the future planning of Northern Ireland.
There is a new war in Iraq after Saddam Hussein decides to expel the UN commission responsible for monitoring Iraq's disarmament planned after the end of the first Gulf war.
Nelson Mandela divorces his wife Winnie, at the center of several scandals. Shortly thereafter, at the African National Congress, Mandela announces his next withdrawal from political life.
In Kyōto, Japan, the Kyōto protocol is signed among 159 states to contain the greenhouse effect.
Earthquake of Umbria and Marche.
Pope John Paul II visits Cuba, where the pontiff is received by Fidel Castro. The Pope condemns the American embargo and calls for greater respect for human rights.
The President of the United States Clinton is involved in a scandal for his sexual relationship with intern Monica Lewinsky. Congress opens an impeachment procedure for the charge of obstruction of justice but Clinton is acquitted the following year. Despite the Sexgate Clinton's popularity remains high and Democrats win parliamentary elections.
The government of Belgrade invades the province of Kosovo, opening a new policy of ethnic cleansing against the Albanian majority that flees en masse towards Albania and Macedonia. The United States of America and some European countries, including Italy, intervene with heavy air raids against Serbia. Serbian dictator Slobodan Milošević withdraws from Kosovo on which UNMIK peace mission intervenes.
The IRA, the British and Irish governments and the Protestant paramilitary groups reached an agreement on 10 April, Good Friday.
On July 12, the French national team won the football world championship in France, winning its first title.
Two bombs explode in the American embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, killing 200 people.
Former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet is arrested by the Spanish police.
A Swissair plane crashes a few miles from the Canadian coast and causes 229 victims.
On 4 September, Google LLC was founded.
The Euro enters into force in the European Union, not yet in the form of cash.
13 May Italy: the former Governor of the Bank of Italy Carlo Azeglio Ciampi was elected President of the Republic at the first ballot.
Romano Prodi is the new President of the European Commission.
The dioxin-contaminated food scandal is spreading.
Massive demonstrations of the square against what is called "the imperialism of the West" make the summit of the WTO fail. The no-global movement, known at the time as the "people of Seattle" is born.
Vladimir Putin, the new Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, orders severe attacks on Chechnya.
After the great success of the first, Sony Computer Entertainment presents to the press the Sony PlayStation 2.
On December 20, Macau's mastery to Portugal ends. The island will return to China.
With the end of the Cold War, the world geopolitical framework moves accordingly on ethnic conflicts and other local crises.
At the Italian level, the fall of the Berlin Wall was like a rain of boulders that more in all directions and still continue to dust, in fact the effects of that historical disaster were wide, complex and unpredictable. The relapse was wider than mere politics, because it involved also the collective imagination: "the entire Italian society seems (...) not to have understood or digested developments after the 1980s, the years where progress was but docile, and the past remained fixed in vaporous hair and comics clothes."
The case of bribes and the end of the Cold War determine in Italy a series of epochal political reversals: following the heavy accusations of corruption and the drastic collapse of consents, parties such as the Christian Democracy and the Socialist Party are dissolved. Others, like the Communist Party and the Social Movement change name (respectively in the Democratic Party of the Left and the National Alliance) and choose a more moderate political orientation. Then, new comrades, such as Forza Italia, are being created and others are being strengthened as the North League, which even became the fourth political force in parliament after the elections for the 11th legislature of 5 and 6 April 1992. Therefore, a new phase of Italian politics is born that, despite the constitutional charter has remained unchanged, is identified with the name of Second Republic.
The wide spread of Microsoft operating systems, Windows 95 and 98, decrees the success of the compatible IBM PC. The other production companies will withdraw from the market. Apple, however, will return to be competitive in the end of the decade thanks to the return of Steve Jobs to the management and launch of the iMac line
The mobile phone becomes, especially in Italy, a real mass accessory. The standard most used is GSM, but towards the end of the decade new technologies are developed that will lead to the creation of third generation mobile phones.
The phenomenon of multimedia CD-ROMs is born, but it is soon reduced by the development of content available on the Internet.
It is the decade of Internet development. In 1998 Google was born.
The Finnish Linus Torvalds began the development of the Linux kernel by distributing it under the GNU GPLv2 license. This inaugurated the era of Linux operating systems.
The PlayStation, one of the first consoles to take advantage of 3D graphics, rids the videogames console market, becoming one of the most sold consoles in the world (over 100 million machines sold).
In 1996, Dolly sheep was cloned.
International cinema sees a clear prevalence of American films that, even in Italy, occupy most of the distribution circuit.
There is a clear return of the cinema engaged in serious themes (Philadelphia, Schindler's List) but also clear provocations to the costume and complaints of youth discomfort (Trainspotting, The Full Monty).
There is a clear return of the catastrophic and spectacular films, which already in the seventies, although more contained in the visual rendering, had received a broad consensus. Science fiction is affirmed as a genre not subject to a decline of interest by the public (as opposed to the horror genre).
Since the early 1990s, computer graphics, first with Terminator 2 - The Day of Judgment (1991) and above all with Jurassic Park (1993) will show itself in all its potential, since for the first time are realized long scenes completely virtual. For this reason, and given the enormous success in the audience, the productions of this kind of film will require increasing budgets and the special effects, according to the critics, will in some cases come to steal the scene to the very plot of the work and its contents (Independence Day).
In 1995 Lars von Trier and Thomas Vinterberg founded the Dogma 95 movement.
In 1994 the film Forrest Gump was released. In the same year Quentin Tarantino, already a success with Le hyena, attracted, with his masterpiece Pulp Fiction, the attention of world critics.
At the beginning of the decade the thriller genre has a broad consensus (among the greatest successes Misery must not die) hybridizing sometimes with horror and erotic (The silence of the innocent, Basic Instinct) but then there will not be many other important productions.
The superheroic genre dominates the cinemas thanks above all to Batman's saga: the films Batman - Il ritorno (1992) and Batman Forever (1995) gained a remarkable success of collections, public and critical, but the flop of Batman & Robin (1997) marked the crisis of the genre, which recovered in the early 2000s thanks to Bryan Singer's X-Men and Sam Raimi's Spider-Man.
The animation knows a new rebirth and Disney, after the period of crisis of the eighties, returns in vogue producing a feature film a year.The most representative, who have seen combined a high merchandising action:
The Beauty and the Beast (1991)
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996)
In 1995, Toy Story, the first computer graphics animated feature film produced by Pixar Animation Studios, was released. In fact, computer graphics had already been used in Disney films since The Beauty and the Beast of 1991, but never for the entire duration of the film.
Souls (Japanese cartoons) begin to gain first public and critical acclaim at an international level thanks to the distribution in Western cinemas of Akira's animated feature films by Katsuhiro . Ghost in the Shell by Mamoru Oshii and Princess Mononoke by Hayao Miyazaki.
In 1997 there was the colossal Titanic that led to success Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet and Céline Dion singing the soundtrack, My Heart Will Go On.
In 1999 he returned to the cinema after sixteen years of absence the great sci-fi saga Star Wars with the new movie Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Threat, which gets the title of film with the biggest payout of the year.
After 12 years of silence, Stanley Kubrick completes his last work. Eyes Wide Shut sees as protagonists Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman, at the time still married, in their maximum performance as a couple. The movie comes out posthumously on July 16, 1999, after the death of the director in March of the same year.
Particularly influential in the first half of the decade is the grunge phenomenon, an alternative rock genre that sinks its origins in the late 1980s Seattle. The movement quickly disappears following the suicide of Kurt Cobain, leader of Nirvana, in 1994. Another particularly important musical phenomenon in the nineties is the nu metal, hybrid between metal and other musical genres (hip hop, alternative rock, grunge, industrial metal, funk). The phenomenon begins in 1994, with the release of the homonymous debut of the Korns, followed a year later by Adrenaline of the Deftones, then continues with the debut of other groups including Limp Bizkit, Coal Chamber, Sevendust, Incubus, P.O.D., Papa Roach and Slipknot. In the following decade will also emerge the Linkin Park, the most successful commercial group of the genre. The nineties are also considered those of the rebirth of the greatest punk rock trade, thanks to the success of the band due to Rancisknot.
On 11 May 1990 Ligabue, the first album by Luciano Ligabue, was released in Italy. The same year, Articoli 31, composed of J-Ax and DJ Jad, the first Italian rap group to collect a vast commercial success.
On August 12, 1991, he released the album of the same name Metallica also called The Black Album, becoming one of the most famous and sold albums in the history of rock and metal.
On November 24, 1991, Freddie Mercury, Queen's leader, died of AIDS.
In 1991 the Red Hot Chili Peppers became known to the general public, with the album Blood Sugar Sex Magik. The album, mixing elements of rock, rap and funk, will inspire in part the subsequent musical trends.
In 1992, I Will Always Love You, reinterpretation of a 1974 Dolly Parton song by Whitney Houston, was released in the soundtrack of the film Guardia del corpo where the American diva recited with Kevin Costner, and became the best-selling single in history by a female artist, with over 16 million copies sold.
Among the other successful female artists of the decade are also Janet Jackson, with the janet albums. (1993) and The Velvet Rope (1997), Alanis Morissette, in particular with his 1995 album Jagged Little Pill, Björk and Lauryn Hill, who in 1998 will publish his only studio album, The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill getting the acclaim of the critics. But Mariah Carey will be the most sold female artist of the decade thanks also to the unprecedented success of his single Christmas All I Want For Christmas is You, released in 1994 and that will soon become a classic of the genre.
In pop music you can see the phenomenon of boy bands, music groups often created at the table by music producers, made up of boys, in which everyone sings and dances and nobody plays any instrument. Among the most famous are the Take That and the Backstreet Boys. At the end of the decade also their female counterparts, such as the Spice Girls and the All Saints, are born.
In the first part of the decade the genre Britpop was born that sees as pioneers of the genre the brothers Noel Gallagher and Liam Gallagher of the band Oasis, the Verve and the Blur, both obtain an amazing success worldwide with the approximately 45 million records sold by the Oasis in just 3 years.
Other important pop artists of the decade were Robbie Williams (once abandoned the Take That), Britney Spears and the evergreen Madonna; after a period of crisis, Cher returns to success with Believe and becomes the oldest singer to have a number one in the standings; in Italy Believe will remain at the top for 11 weeks in a row.
In Italy, thanks also to their lucky participation in the Sanremo Festival, new voices are said; it is the case of Laura Pausini, who in 1993 won the New Proposals with Loneliness. In 1994 he was also successful tenor Andrea Bocelli with the piece Il mare calmo della sera. While in 1995, Giorgia won surprise among the Big with the song As I know. La Pausini and Bocelli in particular will also have a great international success.
There will be a great success of dance music, which will also contaminate the pop genre. Eurodance achieves a great commercial success that reaches the peak between 1993 and 1996, with performers such as Culture Beat, Haddaway, La Bouche, 2 Unlimited, Captain Hollywood Project, Aqua; likewise, there will be the huge success of Italian productions such as Corona, Ice MC, Datura, Da Blitz, Gigi D'Agostino, Eiffel 65, Robert Miles. After this period the House will begin to return in vogue with its subgenre, the French house, which will open the way to the revival of disco music all over the world.
The rappers Tupac Shakur died in 1996 and The Notorious B.I.G. died in 1997. After their departures, numerous posthumous albums will be released, which will help to increase the popularity of rap music, and in particular of its gangsta variant. At the end of the decade the successes of the most famous white rapper, Eminem, begin.
In this decade, several mournings also affect the world of Italian light music. On October 7, 1992 he was cut off by a tumor to the lungs Augusto Daolio voice of the Nomads. On August 6, 1994, Domenico Modugno became famous at the end of the fifties with the song In blue painted blue. On May 12, 1995 at only 47 years old, disappears due to a cardiovascular arrest the singer Mia Martini. Sister major of Loredana Bertè, exordí in the 70's pieces such as Donna solo, Minuetto and Small Man. Sick of almost two years of tumor to the colon, Ivan Graziani died on January 1, 1997, at the age of 51 years. Among his most famous tracks are mentioned Agnese, Florence (Canzone Triste) and Lugano by farewell. On September 9, 1998, in Milan, an incurable evil takes away Lucio Battisti, exactly two months after Aldo Stellita, bassist of the Matia Bazar. January 11, 1999 the same Canzone, the same Cantius and Lugano, the so many successes of the Cantius Marin, the same fate will take to the same fate to the same Touchanto.
During the decade two of the most successful albums are released by American singer-songwriter and dancer Michael Jackson: on November 26, 1991, the album Dangerous (which sold over 45 million copies) and on June 16, 1995, the double album HIStory: Past, Present and Future - Book I, which turns out to be the most sold double album ever by a solo artist, with 30 million copies sold worldwide (corresponding to 60 million units). Later the artist embarks on what will become his last tour, and the most successful one, the HIStory World Tour, with 82 concerts performed in 35 nations and 5 continents with over 4.5 million paying spectators and a collection of over 165 million dollars.
Series such as Law & Order - The two faces of justice, E.R. - Doctors at the forefront, X-Files, NYPD - New York Police Department and many others.
The location comedy Willy, the prince of Bel-Air, Friends, Beverly Hills 90210 etc. are very successful and increasingly followed by each age group.
The Baywatch series, started in 1989 in the USA, has a great success in the early 90s making world famous the model and actress Pamela Anderson.
In 1990 the series I segreti di Twin Peaks directed by David Lynch was born, and has a great success worldwide.
Among the cartoons of the decade are the first cartoons designed also for an adult audience that are broadcast in prime time like The Simpsons, series started in the United States in 1989, but which will have its great success globally in the 1990s, and South Park.
Digital satellite television is born, spread in Italy through the bouquets D+ and Stream. The TV offer is enriched with the transmission of preview films and matches of the Serie A and B championship.
On the Fininvest networks, the news shows appear.
The top models become real stars, among the most popular and most paid Claudia Schiffer, Linda Evangelista and Naomi Campbell.
In Europe are said to be amusement parks and similar facilities designed exclusively for recreation (such as the London Sega World); on April 12, 1992, near Paris, Euro Disney (now known as Disneyland Paris), the first Disney amusement park in Europe.
At the beginning of the decade there was a huge success of the discos, which was maintained until the beginning of the 2000s.
The birth of the culture of sport, well-being and healthy living: sporting goods and clothing, increasingly characterized by research and technology, increase considerably in price (the case of rollerblade shoes, considered heirloom of the decade); the aesthetic centers are spread; the brands of organic products are spread.
The success of the PlayStation leads to the birth of several series soon destined to be very popular and the arrival in Europe of some Japanese series landed until then in the West only up to the United States, as for example, in the first case, those of Tomb Raider (whose protagonist Lara Croft will become one of the sex-symbols videoludici par excellence) and Resident Evil. In the second, those of Final Fantasy from the seventh chapter and Metal Gear from Metal Gear Solid: the generation of the second half of the nineties is so called PlayStation Generation.
In the middle of the decade it will make much discussion of the unexpected and seemingly inexplicable success of the Tamagotchi, the virtual chick of Japanese invention to be raised and cared for;
In 1997 cyberspace culture began to spread and terms such as "virtual", "click", "sail", "connected" and "on-line" became common use;
The Personal computer becomes more accessible in the price, especially if assembled, and enters most of the houses; exponential diffusion in the tertiary sector:
In public offices, partial digitisation of archives and data begins;
In the technical studies, at the end of the decade, the design began to be imposed on the computer and, given the greater flexibility in making changes, as well as drawing up high numbers of copies of the works, all the material such as pencils, technicians and pens in china, historically equipped with designers, fall in a little more than a year in disuse and some articles even come out of production.
Typewriters fall completely into disuse;
Microsoft Windows operating system is imposed and many news will resume the assault of customers at computer stores at the release of Windows 95;
The telematic era begins and, given the ease with which sensitive personal data can now be transmitted and exchanged, the privacy debate begins (1997);
At the end of the decade, impressive success of the Chat Line.
In European countries, including Italy in the first place, immigration from countries from Eastern Europe, North Africa and Albania is taking place.
Many changes in the transport sector:
In the middle of the decade, vehicles such as the moped will be completely supplanted by scooters;
The "normal" petrol and shortly after the "super" (red spear) come out of production; in the distributors at the end of the decade only green petrol (SP) and diesel are delivered;
Self-service distributors are required 24 hours.
Between the second and third millenniums, or the first decade of the 21st century, the short decade was defined for the speed of innovation in all sectors and for the virtually limited duration between 2001, with the collapse of the Twin Towers, and 2008, with the beginning of the economic and political crisis of the following decade.
Concerns about the Millennium bug are basically unfounded.
The beginning of the "2000s" (even if not coinciding with the third millennium) is greeted with great celebrations all over the planet.
The General Assembly of the United Nations proclaims the decade 2000-2009 "International Decade for the Culture of Peace and Non-Violence."
7 May: Vladimir Putin is appointed President of the Russian Federation after winning the presidential election (held on 26 March), thus succeeding Boris El'cin.
17 July: Bashar al-Assad succeeds Father Hafiz as President of Syria.
The presidential election of November 7, 2000 in the United States of America saw the Republican George W. Bush's victory of measure against the Democratic candidate Al Gore, although the latter obtained more votes. The Supreme Court ruled Bush's victory also in Florida, the state where the results are most disputed. However, many dispute the regularity of the elections.
Crazy cow disease is spreading throughout Europe, a disease that affects cattle fed with animal meal. The consumption of beef is falling throughout the Old Continent.
The clashes between Israelis and Palestinians continue. In August, extremist Hamas declared the second intifada.
19 July - 22 July: the G8 World Summit is held in Genoa, where there are many episodes of clashes between demonstrators and police and serious disturbances within the city. On 20 July a young protester named Carlo Giuliani was killed by the Carabinieri, while he was trying to launch an extinguisher against a Arma patrol. According to Amnesty International it is the "most serious suspension of democratic rights in a Western country after the Second World War."
September 11: A group of Islamist terrorists affiliated to al-Qaeda (Al Qaeda) crashes two civilian planes against the Twin Towers of New York, which will collapse within 102 minutes due to the damage caused by the impacts and subsequent fires. Another plane is directed against the Pentagon while a quarter, which would have hit the White House or the Capitol, thanks to a passenger revolt does not reach its goal but plunges into a lawn in Pennsylvania. They will count themselves victims, more or less in the following years due to the fumes and toxic debris released by the collapse of the towers, which contained hundreds of tons of asbestos. The United States of America and the whole West are in shock. The fear of terrorism spreads all over the world and in many countries imposing security measures are carried out.
Swissair, the Swiss flag company, claims bankruptcy due to economic problems. The event is known as Swissair's Grounding.
7 October: US President Bush orders the attack on the Taliban regime accused of offering protection to terrorists responsible for the September 11 attacks: this is how the war in Afghanistan begins.
October 8: A flight to Denmark collides on the Linate track with a Cessna killing over 100 people.
12 November: the Ocrida agreement provides for a ceasefire in the Republic of Macedonia; this event marks the official end of the civil war in Yugoslavia.
1 January: the euro as a single currency is introduced in 12 Member States of the European Union (Italy, France, Austria, Germany, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, the Netherlands, Belgium, Finland, Greece, Luxembourg).
The first Taliban inmates arrive at the American military base in Guantanamo, which rises in front of the Cuban coasts. Prison is outside the jurisdiction of the US courts. In the following years, the charges against the prison increase, where the CIA is suspected to use torture and methods "unrespectful of human rights" against the prisoners. It will be closed in 2009.
20 May: East Timor gains independence from Indonesia.
June 30: Brazilian national team wins the South Korea and Japan football world championship, winning its fifth title.
9 July: The African Union was officially born, with Thabo Mvuyelwa Mbeki as its first President.
September 10: Switzerland officially joins the UN.
Reid Hoffman and Allen Blue launch LinkedIn, inspired by Stanley Milgram's six degree separation theory.
It spreads, especially in Asia, the "atypical pneumonia" called SARS.
Space Shuttle Columbia disintegrates as it returns to Earth. The seven astronauts on board will die instantly. An investigation will ensure that Columbia had some dangerous failures before departure, and that they would then be the main cause of the disaster. A rain of accusations falls on NASA.
20 March: The United States of America invades Iraq, following charges against Saddam Hussein's government of possession of weapons of mass destruction. President Bush had tried in the previous months to obtain the UN's endorsement, but meeting the opposition of France and Russia, as well as most public opinions from all over the world. Pope John Paul II also joined the protest choir. The war, renamed second Gulf war, began in March and ended quite quickly; however, despite the capture of Saddam Hussein nine months later, the weapons will never be found as the country plunges into a violent civil war with clashes between Shiites and Sunni, the two largest Iraqi Islamic confessions. The clashes and attacks caused between 2003 and 2006 1.2 million Iraqi deaths and more than 3,000 American soldiers killed.
A strong heat wave is spreading in many countries of Europe during the summer.
The Darfur region, in Western Sudan, is devastated by a raging civil war and continuous raids of Arab mercenaries that cause thousands of deaths and refugees among the civilian population.
March 11: a series of coordinated attacks on the local train system in Madrid causes 191 deaths and 2,057 injuries. The Abu Hafs al Masri Brigade claims the attack: it is the first hit by Al-Qaeda on European territory after 11 September 2001.
Extraordinary color images of Mars reach the Earth by the Spirit space probe that analyzes some craters of the red planet. Already in 1997 the historical ones of the Mars Pathfinder mission were received.
1 May: ten new countries join the European Union: Poland, Slovenia, Hungary, Malta, Cyprus, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, Czech Republic, Slovakia.
August 15: Michael Schumacher mathematically won the 7th driver title in the Formula 1 World Championship.
1 September: a Chechen terrorist commando occupies an elementary school in Beslan, Russia, and kidnaps 1127 people between adults and children. Three days later, the Russian army breaks into the school, causing the reaction of terrorists. 386 people die, 186 of whom are children. Over 700 people are wounded. Many children are mutilated or orphaned. Over 90% of the people taken hostage were injured in some way. The enormity of the wounded put a strain on the entire local health machine with inadequate availability of bandages and medications.
In Ukraine millions of people go to the streets, contesting the election result that gives the victory to Viktor Janukovyč. Elections are cancelled and the subsequent response leads to victory Viktor Juščenko, leader of the Orange Revolution.
Republican George W. Bush is re-elected President of the United States of America, beating Democratic candidate John Kerry.
26 December: the entire area of the Indian Ocean, especially the Asian coasts, is upset by a very violent tsunami that causes billions of euros of damage and more than 200,000 deaths. It is considered one of the greatest natural disasters in history. Immediately after the tsunami, a campaign of solidarity towards the most affected countries is launched worldwide (India, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia).
The general elections in Germany lead to a balance between the Social Democrats of the outgoing Chancellor Gerhard Schröder and the Christian Democrats of Angela Merkel who becomes the first chancellor raised in the East. Merkel is forced to form a government of "great coalition."
2 April: Pope John Paul II dies after twenty-seven years of pontificate. In the following days more than one million people flock to Rome and St Peter's Square to attend his funerals. On 19 April he was elected, after a rapid Conclave, his successor: the German cardinal Joseph Ratzinger who took the name of Benedict XVI.
July 7: terrorist attacks occur on the London subway and on a bus causing 52 victims and 700 injured. The Abu Hafs Brigade at Masri claims the attack and replicates it two weeks later, without causing victims.
Hurricane Katrina overwhelms the south of the United States of America and completely devastates the city of New Orleans. Thousands of people are killed, wounded and homeless.
The Hamas Party wins the Palestinian elections, causing severe reactions in the international community.
February 10 - February 26: the 20th Winter Olympics are held in Turin
10 May: At the fourth ballot, the senator of life Giorgio Napolitano was elected as the new President of the Italian Republic and succeeded Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.
3 June: Montenegro declares independence from Serbia and Montenegro.
July 7: Syd Barrett, the legendary founder of the Pink Floyd, dies.
July 9: the Italian national team wins the World Cup in Germany by beating France 5-3 to the penalty kicks thus winning the fourth world title.
12 July: a commando of Hezbollah enters Israeli territory and kills three soldiers, capturing two more. Israel considers the act a declaration of war: it invades southern Lebanon and bombs some Lebanese cities. After a few days, the counter-offensive of Hezbollah, despite the intervention, persists through missile launches and continues to put in great difficulty the Israeli population. In August, after the truce, the UN Security Council approves a resolution to send the blue helmets to the area.
A Danish newspaper publishes satirical cartoons about Muhammad and Islam. In many Arab countries, Pakistan and India Danish embassies are being attacked. The Vatican expresses its solidarity with the Islamic world.
The avian influenza virus arrives in Europe, carried by migratory birds, which also threatens to affect poultry farms, despite the strengthening of security measures.
30 December: Saddam Hussein is sentenced to death. They protest many countries and organizations against the sentence, while in Iraq tensions increase after the spread of illegal videos in which the former dictator accompanied to the scaffold among the insults of those present.
1 January: Bulgaria and Romania join the European Union, while the euro enters into circulation in Slovenia.
January 9: Apple presents the first version of the iPhone: this is how the large-scale deployment of smartphones begins, invented more than 10 years earlier.
27 June: Tony Blair resigns as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom after 10 years in office. Gordon Brown succeeds him.
Ban Ki-Moon, South Korean Foreign Minister, becomes the new Secretary-General of the United Nations.
From the United States of America, due to the housing crisis of the previous year, there is a financial crisis that will lead to the great recession.
In the former Burma, the population, tired of corruption and extreme misery, goes down to the square protesting peacefully led by groups of Buddhist monks. The military regime that controls the country severely suppresses the demonstrations causing the indignation of all the world public opinions.
17 February: Kosovo declares its independence from Serbia by opening a new political crisis in the Balkans, because Serbia, supported by Russia, refuses to accept Kosovo's decision, but the United States of America and the majority of EU states are in favour of Kosovo.
The primary for the choice of the candidate for the White House of the Democratic Party are marked by a hard battle, full of twists and twists of luck between Hillary Clinton, the first woman to present herself and Barack Obama, the first African American. Obama manages to overcome the rival for a few votes.
China violently suppresses peaceful demonstrations in Tibet, in favour of the cultural and political autonomy of the region. In many, they speculate a boycott in protest of the opening ceremony of the Olympics that will host the country in August. Shortly after China is shocked by a serious earthquake that causes about ten thousand deaths. Nevertheless, the Beijing Olympics will be a surprising success.
In August a military crisis broke out between Russia and Georgia caused by tensions over the status of the autonomous Georgian territories of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Russia invades Georgian territory, reaching Gori, nerve center and native city of Stalin. With European mediation a ceasefire is signed, which provides for the restoration of the status quo, however in the region the tension remains high.
September 10: The Cern in Geneva launches an ambitious project, through a complex particle accelerator, to discover the dynamics of the Big Bang. It is called the most important physical experiment in history, but after a few days the project is interrupted due to a failure of the accelerator.
September 15: The historic keyboardist of Pink Floyd Richard Wright dies in London after a brief fight against cancer.
The mortgage crisis, which broke out the year before in the United States of America, expands worldwide after the cracks of major banking and insurance giants. Governments around the world launch rescue plans in a hurry. It is the most serious financial crisis since the 1930s.
4 November: Barack Obama wins the election by beating Republican John McCain: he becomes the first African-American to hold the office of President in the history of the United States of America.
26 November: India is shocked by a series of attacks against Western targets in Mumbai claimed by an organization near al-Qaeda: more than 200 deaths will be counted, including an Italian, and 327 wounded.
In January, Operation Lead melted on the Gaza Strip launched by Israel in December 2008 to react to the missile attacks of Hamas. After a series of air raids that will cause more than 850 deaths among Palestinians (also hit by a UN school), Israelis carry out a land invasion on the outskirts of Gaza. After a peace conference in Sharm el-Sheikh a new truce is signed and Israel withdraws its troops from the strip.
6 April: a violent earthquake hits Italy in the Abruzzo region, causing enormous damage and 309 victims.
A new type of influence is spreading in North America and Europe, called colloquially swine flu, developed in Mexico, where it causes 152 deaths.
An Air France airliner crashes into the Atlantic Ocean. Only a few corpses will be found while the causes of the disaster remain mysterious.
June 25: The international pop star Michael Jackson died in Los Angeles at the age of 50.
Thousands of young people go to the streets in all the cities of Iran in defense of democracy, accusing outgoing President Ahmadinejad of having won the elections thanks to fraud. After a few days, the regime intervenes harshly repressing the protests. There are numerous dead and wounded, many dissidents are arrested. Young people spread on social networks images and testimonies of repression, which thus make the world around. It is the first revolt spread on the Web.
The economic developments of the first half of the decade were concentrated on Asia and South America and their impact on the world market. The economy of India has been integrated thanks to technology with the most industrialized nations. China has had immense economic growth, and has obtained the status of world power. Many flowered Asian economies quickly have had increasing demand for fossil fuels, which together with a decrease in oil deposits discoveries, large extraction costs and a global political agitation have led to a rise in the price of oil and a push from governments and trade in order to promote the development of renewable energy. However, a side effect of the push by some industrialized nation to naturalize and use biofuels led to a drop in food supplies and a consequent rise in the price of the same. This threatened the third world nations affected by food insufficiency. The economy of the end of the decade was dominated by an economic crisis, started with the crisis of the subprime in the United States of America in late 2007 which led to the financial crisis of Iceland in 2008-2009 and the United Kingdom in September 2007 and a global recession.
In the field of digital electronics, progress has been considerable. Mobile phones, cameras and digital cameras and MP3 players have become objects of common use over a few years. In the industrialized countries, the increasing spread of e-mail use and the progressive spread of broadband has been remarkable.
It spreads in a widespread way, even among the very young and older people, the use of mobile phones, very frequently replaced by more sophisticated models. Very popular at the end of the decade will also be satellite navigators and laptops.
In 2000, the first Nokia 3310 was marketed.
From March 4, 2000 in Japan Sony markets the PlayStation 2, which will become the most sold console of all time from the following decade.
In 2001 Microsoft presented what will become one of the world's most famous Operating Systems: Windows XP. On November 15 of the same year the company launched the first Xbox in response to Sony's PlayStation 2.
The phenomenon of online piracy is rampant: music, movies, DVDs and software applications, are illegally exchanged between computers connected to the Internet by means of file sharing programs.
In February 2004, the famous social network Facebook, designed by Mark Zuckerberg, was presented for the first time.
The entertainment industry has been looking for new digital delivery systems for music, movies and other media that have reduced privacy. E-commerce has become the standard for trading shares, bookings, shopping and other activities.
Following the spread of DVD players, video streaming, and the subsequent birth of the Blu-ray Disc format, the VHS format is permanently released from the distribution of the films since the beginning of 2007, relegated only to home video.
Progressively abandoned or out of production at the end of the decade common objects such as floppy disks, cassettes, photo rolls, walkmans, video recorders, needle printers. Huge diffusion instead of USB and Memory cards, digital cameras, iPods and mp3 players, DVD players and Blu-ray. Multi-touch devices start to spread.
With the diffusion of social networking, the term Web 2.0 is coined. Symbols of which will be sites such as YouTube, MySpace, Facebook and Flickr.
The social networks most used by teenagers and young people of the decade are Myspace and Netlog, which were mostly used until 2009 and then passed, in a few months, to the innovative Facebook.
In 2007, Apple Inc. introduced the iPhone, which will pave the way for the mass production and distribution of smartphones in the following decade.
The 2000s marked the universal success of the saga by Harry Potter by English writer J. K. Rowling, who will mark a new line of fantasy books and books for teenagers. From 1997 to 2007, the seven books in the series sell a total of 450 million copies, making Harry Potter the most successful literary saga in the history of literature.
In 2003, Dan Brown published his hugely successful novel Il codice da Vinci.
In 2005 Twilight, the first book of the tetralogy of vampires by Stephenie Meyer, was published. Initially greeted with enthusiasm by fans of the genre, it became a mass phenomenon with the homonymous series of films, which launched the film career of Robert Pattinson and Kristen Stewart.
At the peak of popularity, the teen pop came into crisis, which saw a young Britney Spears, an artist of great impact for the pop culture of the entire decade. R&B continued with great success, thanks to artists such as Chris Brown, Ne-Yo, Usher, Beyoncé and Alicia Keys.
With regard to dance music there is a high success of house music both in its purest forms and, in the second half of the 2000s, in its most electronic and commercial forms with genres such as electro house and tech-house.
The genre nu metal, born in the late nineties, begins to gain popularity: in 2000 begins the success of Linkin Park with the release of their first studio album, Hybrid Theory, the most successful record of the genre, which sells more than 30 million copies (the best-selling CD of the decade), results repeated with Meteora and Minutes to Midnight. The main pioneers of the genre are Korn, Deftones, Slipknot and System of a Down. The golden moment of the Red Hot Chili Peppers continues, with the albums By the Way and Stadium Arcadium.
Since 2000, rap is also back in vogue, which is drawn by artists like Eminem and 50 Cent. The committed or "alternative" rock evolves and finds great performers such as the Muse, Coldplay, U2 (already famous in the 80s and 90s), Depeche Mode (more connected to synth pop) and Foo Fighters.
The Radiohead of Thom Yorke live in the first part of the decade a very positive period, realizing Amnesiac, In Rainbows and especially Kid A, considered by the prestigious magazine Rolling Stone the best album of the decade. Another band of the British panorama, the Oasis, instead, begin negatively the decade (after having been mattators and musical innovators in the last one), with the album Standing on the Shoulder of Giants, which with almost 4 million copies sold turns out to be their greatest commercial failure in their career. However, they resume towards the middle of the decade with the album Don't Believe the Truth, which sells 8 million copies and is followed by a colossal world tour, which then turns out to be one of the most successful ones of the same decade. After publishing their seventh album, Dig Out Your Soul, the group dissolves in August 2009, after a violent fight between the two historical faces of the group, the brothers Noel and Liam Gallagher, following their seventh album, having released their two separate tracks, categorizingly and every single.
They are popular pop punk-emo pop-punk rock artists such as My Chemical Romance, Panic! At The Disco, Fall Out Boy, Paramore and Green Day. In Europe, indie rock spreads, in fact the popularity of bands such as Kaiser Chiefs, White Stripes, Arctic Monkeys and Strokes grows.
In addition, the soul pop genre with 1960s atmosphere comes back in a strong fashion, especially after the great international success of Amy Winehouse, to which new names like Duffy or Adele follow. In recent years numerous reunions take place among the bands that in the past have achieved great success, with the return of groups such as, among many others, Spandau Ballet, Duran Duran, The Cranberries, Take That, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Police, Genesis, Spice Girls, AC/DC and the return to historical formation by Iron Maiden.
In the last years of the decade, synth pop music in the 80s style returns overpoweringly, both in pop music, with artists such as Katy Perry or Lady Gaga, as well as in the alternative scene, with artists such as Hot Chip, Mystery Jets, Empire of the sun, La Roux, Santigold or The Killers.
The Pink Floyd loses two important members: the first to die, on July 7, 2006, is the founder, Syd Barrett and then, on September 15, 2008 it will be up to keyboardist Richard Wright to say goodbye to the world.
On June 25, 2009, King of the Pop died, Michael Jackson, cut off from a heart attack due to a drug poisoning by Propofol. His personal doctor, Conrad Murray, was sentenced to 4 years in prison for manslaughter. Just at the beginning of 2000, Jackson had published what would become his last studio album, Invincible (2001).
The aforementioned Eminem is the best-selling artist of the decade, with a total of 32,2 million albums sold.
American cinema is the absolute dominant of the Western market. For American cinema it is a decade, on an actorial level, marked by divism; among the most famous stars George Clooney, Brad Pitt, Angelina Jolie, Johnny Depp, Charlize Theron, Will Smith, Leonardo DiCaprio and Heath Ledger, whose fame is nourished after the tragic death, with the Oscar as the best non-protagonist actor won posthumously for his interpretation in The Dark Knight. The success of Bryan Singer's X-Men and the Spider-Man trilogy directed by Sam Raimi will re-launch the superhero genre on the big screen, after a stop joke due to the failure of Batman & Robin in the previous decade, paving the way for many other successful franchises such as the Marvel Cinematic Universe. During the decade many films are the "pillatutto" films, that earn more than 500 million dollars to the boxings of Accademys: many nominations and S.
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (and the following)
The saga of The Lord of the Rings
Sam Raimi's Spider-Man Trilogy
The first three films of the Pirates of the Caribbean saga
Iron Man (film that marked the beginning of the profitable MCU)
The saga of The Lord of the Rings is a great success: with the three films released in 2001, 2002 and 2003, the trilogy will be awarded with a total of 17 Oscar prizes (4 for The Company of the Ring, 2 for The two towers and 11 for The King's Return).
In 2007, with the success of Harry Potter and the Order of Phoenix (938 million dollars in the world, sixth biggest success of all time and second largest in the series), Harry Potter's films become the most productive film adaptations of all time.
James Cameron's Avatar, made in 2009 at the end of the decade, cashes 2,718 billion dollars worldwide, becoming the biggest film in the decade and in the history of cinema, exceeding the director's Titanic record. This is also thanks to the relaunch of 3D cinema technology and, consequently, also at the cost of increased tickets.
The Asian film industry continues to gain more and more international support. In India, at least in film festivals, and through a film influenced by its canons such as the Oscar The Millionaire Award, the world's most productive film industry is becoming stronger and indomitable, but it is limited to producing films for the national market, but it is gaining consensus in the West at least in film festivals, and through a film influenced by its canons such as the Oscar The Millionaire Award. Chinese cinema produces so much high-budget and kolossal works, such as Hero and The Forest of Flying Daggers, both directed by Zhang Yimou, as well as more introspective and minimalist films, a field where Wong Kar-Wai's work is very significant (even internationally) is still the most famous international film. Two times in the decade a Japanese film has been nominated for the Oscar for the best foreign film, winning it in 2008 for Departures by Yōjirōkita Takita. Another prosperous feature of cinema.
Disney animated movies instead have a setback and do not achieve the results they had achieved in the previous decade; movies such as The Fools of the Emperor (2000), Dinosaurs (2000), Atlantis - The Lost Empire (2001) and The Planet of the Treasure (2002) do not get much success, although some will become cult movies in the following years.
The Pixar, still only distributed by Disney, produces almost a great success every year with films such as Monsters & Co. (2001), Looking for Nemo (2003), Gli Incrediblei (2004), Cars (2006), Ratatouille (2007), WALL•E (2008) and Up (2009), decreeing a substantial end to the traditional animation that will soon be supplanted by the one in computer graphics.
While Disney has a decline, its "rival," the DreamWorks, knows instead its golden decade, thanks to the success of the box office of computer animation films such as Shrek (2001), Madagascar (2005), Kung Fu Panda (2008) and Monsters against aliens (2009), which will also have many followers and spin off in the following decades, both for cinema and television.
In Europe are mostly significant the works of notable authors, who often win at international festivals. Among the most appreciated European authors during the decade are Roman Polański, Michael Haneke, the Brothers Dardenne, Pedro Almodóvar, Alejandro Amenabar, Lars von Trier, Aki Kaurismaki and Emir Kusturica. German cinema evokes aspects of life in the DDR with films such as Good Bye, Lenin! by Wolfgang Becker and The lives of the others by Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck, who also wins the Oscar for the best foreign film in 2006. Celebrates and important in all the world two films that are produced in Europe in this decade: The fabulous world of Amélie by Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Speaks with her by Pedro Almodóvar.
The American television series still dominates it with success series such as Smallville and Heroes, which relaunches the superhero genre also on television, CSI - Crime scene, Desperate Housewives, A Mother for Friend, Dr. House - Medical Division, Grey's Anatomy and Breaking Bad.
On September 22, 2004, the first episode of Lost was broadcast, a series that will have a great global success.
The reality shows are getting more and more crazy, especially after the success of Big Brother, and talent shows; among the most famous ones born in this decade are American Idol, The X Factor and Got Talent.
Among the most successful cartoon series for television of the decade are The Griffin, Futurama and SpongeBob all three started at the end of the previous decade, in 1999, and others born in the decade 2000 as American Dad!, Two fantasy parents, Avatar - The legend of Aang, Peppa Pig and Ben 10.
Germany, which reduces the occupation of Poland, applies the principles of the lightning war and within a few months invades Denmark and Norway, then Benelux and France.
The war takes place between the British Empire and Germany: aviation in the British Isles prevents Germans from using the lightning war in their territory.
Operation Dinamo: begins the evacuation of the British Expedition Corps from Dunkerque, composed of European soldiers who escaped the capture by the German army.
On 10 June Italy declared war on France and the British Empire: the Mediterranean became a war front.
Operation Catapult: the French military fleet is rendered unusable before the German Navy can take possession of it.
On 10 July, following the German invasion of France, France was born in Vichy, with Marshal Philippe Pètain as head of state.
The Tripartite Pact is signed: Germany, Italy and Japan align themselves with anti-communist activities.
On October 28, Italy invaded Greece.
On December 10, the Italian army stationed in the Libyan colony (Sidi Barrani, Egypt) crossed the border of British Egypt, but withdrew to the starting positions.
Battle of Capo Matapan between the Regia Marina and the Royal Navy.
Greece is occupied by Axis forces, on 27 April the Germans enter Athens
British troops enter Italian possessions in Ethiopia and Tobruk.
On 1 April, Axis forces invade Yugoslavia.
May 27th: sinking of the Bismarck battleship.
On June 22nd, Operation Barbarossa took place against the Soviet Union.
At the end of July, Jewish rakings and deportations to concentration and extermination camps began in Europe.
On December 7, Japanese aircraft are bombarding Pearl Harbor, the naval base of the U.S. Navy. Following this, the United States declare war on the Axis. A new scenario of war on the Pacific opens.
Konrad Zuse invents the first computer, the Z3.
On 1 January 26 countries signed the Atlantic Charter.
On May 1, the Battle of the Coral Sea begins.
On June 4, the Battle of the Midways begins.
Nuclear technology is developed, which will lead to the development of both a new source of energy and new weapons of mass destruction, such as the atomic bomb.
On June 27, the Germans entered Sevastopol.
The 1st Marine Division lands in Florida, Tulagi and Guadalcanal on August 7.
August 19, Dieppe, France, Canadian, British departments, a handful of rangers and men from France Free land on the French coast, giving rise to a raid.
On September 13, the Germans entered Stalingrad.
23 October: Second Battle of El Alamein
Operation Torch, on November 8 the Allied landings in North-West Africa begin.
November 19: the Soviet counter-offensive begins in Stalingrad, which will lead to the annihilation of the 6th German Army.
The Soviet army at the end of December forced the Axis to a dramatic retreat in the snow following the second defensive battle of the Don.
At the University of Pennsylvania, in the United States, ENIAC, the first general purpose computer in history, is assembled.
With the surrender of the 11th Army Corps, all German resistance to Stalingrad ceases, it is February 2nd; on the whole eastern front the Soviet advance begins.
On April 19, the Germans began the barbaric destruction of the Warsaw Ghetto.
In Africa it is proclaimed the "cessate the fire," stops all resistance from the Axis, the Allies have conquered the entire continent. It is May 11.
July 5: German offensive starts in the salient Kursk, is Operation Citadel.
July 10 - Landing in Sicily: the Allies land in Sicily.
25 July - Fall of Fascism: the Grand Council of Fascism votes on the agenda Grandi, placing Benito Mussolini, who is arrested by Vittorio Emanuele III.
On September 8, Italy signed the armistice with the Anglo-American forces. Southern Italy (the part occupied by the Anglo-American forces) abandoned the axis and allied with the allies. The War of Liberation began in Italy.
9 September - Landing in Salerno: the Allies land in Salerno.
23 September: Benito Mussolini, freed from the Germans, founded the Italian Social Republic.
On June 6, Allied troops land on the beaches of Normandy. It is the D-Day.
The decade sees the decline of the Axis-related powers, the consequent fall of the Nazi-fascist totalitarian regimes and the beginning of the struggle between the capitalist model and the communist model in what will soon be baptized the Cold War.
On April 25, Italy was liberated from Nazifascism thanks to the help of the allies, later declared National Festival Day in the Italian Republic.
On April 28, Benito Mussolini, captured the day before in Dongo by the partisans of the Garibaldi Brigade, was shot together with his lover Clara Petacci.
On April 30, Adolf Hitler committed suicide in the Fuhrerbunker
On 8 May, Hitler's successor, Admiral Karl Dönitz, signed the unconditional surrender for Germany. The war in Europe ended.
On August 6 and 9, the United States launched two atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
On September 2, Japan signs its surrender. With this act the Second World War ends.
Percy Spencer discovers the properties of microwaves.
On 2 June Italy held the elections for the Constitutional Assembly and the Referendum on the form of state. Italy became a republic.
The US Secretary of State, General George Marshall, announces his economic aid plan (known as the Marshall Plan) for the reconstruction of Europe. It is the economic counterpart of the Truman doctrine.
The Transistor, the predecessor of the microchip, is made.
For the first time, the sound wall was broken by a piloted aircraft, the Bell X-1, by Chuck Yeager.
On 22 December, the Constitution of the Italian Republic was approved by the Constitutional Assembly, which was promulgated by the Provisional Head of the De Nicola State on 27 December.
The Constitution of the Italian Republic shall enter into force on 1 January.
The United Nations approves the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The English domain of Burma ends
Israel's Republic is officially established
The first 33 rpm discs are produced.
The NATO Treaty, the Atlantic Pact, was signed in Washington on 4 April 1949 and entered into force on 24 August of the same year.
On October 1, Mao Zedong proclaimed the People's Republic of China in view of the final victory against the Republic of China nationalist of Chiang Kai-shek during the Chinese Civil War.
Vittorio Emanuele III of Savoy
From 13 to 30 July, Uruguay hosts the first edition of the World Cup football: the victory will be the hosts.
The feature film Il re del jazz, one of the first color musicals, is produced.
The planet dwarf Pluto is discovered.
May 1: New York inaugurates the Empire State Building, which takes the world's highest skyscraper title from the Chrysler Building.
In Chicago Al Capone is arrested for tax evasion by Eliot Ness and his companions (the Untouchables) and sentenced to 11 years imprisonment.
19 September: Japan invades Manchuria, establishing the puppet state of Manchukuò.
Ernst Ruska develops the electronic microscope
16 June - 9 July Switzerland: at the Lausanne conference it is decided to condone payments due for war repairs to Germany.
May 21-22: American Amelia Earhart is the first woman to fly over the Atlantic.
The first Technicolor film is produced.
January 30: Adolf Hitler is elected German Chancellor. Beginning of the Nazi regime in Germany that will lead to the Second World War; the first extermination camps are built and anti-Semitism becomes more and more marked.
The President of the United States of America Franklin D. Roosevelt starts the New Deal policy to fight the Great Depression.
Prohibition is abolished in the United States.
25 July: Chancellor Dollfuss was assassinated in Austria.
On June 10, Italy won its first title at the World Cup.
June 14, in Venice, the first official meeting between Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler.
The swing is established as a definitive component of jazz and begins to spread all over the world. It begins the era of the numerous big bands.
Gerhard Domagk experiences the first sulfamidic.
At the dawn of October 3, the first Italian troops from Eritrea cross the border with Ethiopia; the war of Ethiopia begins. The international community unanimously condemns Italy, and on November 18, the Society of Nations inflicts economic sanctions on it.
On January 20, King George V of the United Kingdom died, and his firstborn son was succeeded by Edward VIII.
In the afternoon of May 5, Marshal Pietro Badoglio entered Addis Ababa; thus ended the war of Ethiopia.
A failed attempt at a coup d'état against the legitimate republican government by extreme right-wing Spanish nationalist groups quickly results in a civil war. Thus, the Spanish civil war breaks out.
At the Berlin Olympics, the American-Afro athlete Jesse Owens won four gold medals in athletics.
On December 11, King Edward VIII of the United Kingdom abdicated to marry the American Wallis Simpson, and succeeded his brother as George VI.
The first book by H. P. Lovecraft, Dagon, was published.
On June 14, in the United States of America, President Roosevelt signed the Marijuana Tax Act, initiating Prohibition against cannabis.
Tuesday, December 21: at the Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles was presented in world premiere Snow White and the seven dwarfs, the first animated feature film in the history of cinema and film that began the success of Disney.
With the Anschluss, Austria was annexed to Nazi Germany on 12 March.
In June the football world championships are held, won for the second time consecutively by Italy.
In June, the number one action comics series was released, which saw Superman's debut.
In Germany, persecution against the Jews reached its peak in November in the Crystal Night.
In March Madrid was conquered by the Phalangists. In Spain the civil war ended with the victory of General Franco and the establishment of a dictatorial regime in the country.
Detective Comics' No. 27 was released in May, where he made his first Batman appearance.
1 September: Germany invades Poland, which marks the outbreak of World War II.
Frank Sinatra becomes the first idol of the very young thanks to his song All or Nothing at All.
15 December: Atlanta is the world premiere of the film Via col vento, winner of 10 Oscar Awards.
Igor Sikorsky and Ernst Heinkel build the helicopter to a rotor and the jet plane respectively.
Luther George Simjian designs the first ATM.
In Italy Giovanni Verga is appointed senator for life.
The Chinese Communist Party was born, among the leaders of Mao Tse-tung.
Albert Einstein wins the Nobel Prize in Physics for contributions to theoretical physics, in particular for the discovery of the law of photoelectric effect.
July 17: the Vado F.C. wins the first Italian Cup; the network of Virgilio Felice Levratto, who for joy made an entire round of naked field.
28 and 29 October: march on Rome of the Fascists. Benito Mussolini, exponent of Fascism, takes power as the head of the Italian government.
4 November: discovery of Pharaoh Tutankhamon's tomb by Howard Carter.
On September 1, a catastrophic earthquake followed by a fire destroys Tokyo and Yokohama, causing nearly 100,000 victims.
The construction of the Highway of the Lakes, the first motorway in the world, connecting Milan with the cities of Como and Varese, and the areas of Lake Como and Lake Maggiore, is underway.
27 August: the URI (Italian Radio Union) was born.
6 October: first radio broadcast in Italy
Iosif Stalin becomes president of the USSR after a struggle in power with Trotskji.
Charles Birdseye's first experiments on food freezing.
Coco Chanel fashion house is born
Adolf Hitler exposes his political program in the book Mein Kampf ("My Battle")
The Italian actor Rodolfo Valentino, one of the first great Hollywood divines, dies in the USA.
Charles Lindbergh made the first Atlantic crossing from New York to Paris on board the Spirit of Saint Louis plane.
Werner Heisemberg announces the principle of uncertainty.
Sunday, November 18: Walt Disney showed his first short film of Mickey Mouse, entitled Steamboat Willie.
Richard Drew invented the tape.
Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin.
Frank Whittle developed the jet engine.
Kodak launched color movies.
The Italian airship left, designed and led by Admiral Umberto Nobile.
Disastrous collapse of the Wall Street stock exchange, with relative growth in unemployment.
February 11, 1929: signing of the Lateran Pacts, the agreement between the State of the Church (now Vatican City) and the Italian State.
It's the decade of the roaring years.
Female Emancipation: the fashion of the "Man" (flapper) begins; girls uninhibited with short hair crowd the dance clubs.
Post-war crisis in Germany: the mark is devalued to such an extent that banknotes are used as fuel.
Futurism took on a character of absolute importance in the twenties, strongly encouraging progress and modernity. It then developed into Rationalism.
The first passenger flights are born.
The sound cinema was born: in 1927 The jazz singer (The Jazz Singer) was the first film to speak of history. The first special effects were born.
Mickey Mouse was born on Sunday, November 18, 1928 at the Colony Theatre in New York, in the short film Steamboat Willie.
In the United States the "age of jazz" begins: despite prohibitionism, night clubs are attacked by a population in the mood of partying.
In 1925 the first prototype television set was built.
Conquest of Ciudad Juárez by the revolutionary army of Pancho Villa during the Mexican Revolution.
The great composer Gustav Mahler dies in Vienna after a long illness.
Second Moroccan crisis (Agadir crisis)
Ernest Rutherford develops the first model of an atom with a central nucleus.
Italo-Turkish war breaks out for the possession of Libya.
April 15: After colliding with an iceberg, the Titanic transatlantic sink in less than three hours, bringing with it about 1,500 people, mostly of the 3rd class, saving about 705. All survivors of the most famous shipwreck of the time are rescued by the boat from Carpathia.
Over a million Wales miners cross their arms in a gigantic general strike.
November 28: the Albanian nation is born.
October 8: The First Balkan War begins.
Alfred Lothar Wegener formulates the theory of the drift of continents.
Siege of Adrianopoli, October of the same year.
On June 16, the Second Balkan War broke out.
First in Paris, on May 29, of The Spring Festival of Igor Stravinsky.
28 June: Archduke Francesco Ferdinand, heir to the throne of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, was killed together with his wife in an attack in Sarajevo, at the hands of the Serbian independent Gavrilo Princip.
July 28: World War I begins.
The first 35 mm camera is assembled.
24 May: Italy enters war alongside France and Great Britain
The Lusitania, a ship of the Cunard Line sister of the Mauretania in competition with the Titanic, Olympic and Britannic, is sunk by a German submarine.
At the beginning of the year a strong seismic shock of the 7th Richter scale hits the Marsica, an internal region of Abruzzo, destroying several places, including Avezzano, and causing 30,000 victims. (Marsica earthquake)
May 11: Albert Einstein publishes the theory of general relativity.
November 21: The British, sister ship of the Titanic, is sunk by a German mine although it clearly bears the signs of a hospital ship. Now it is located at the bottom of the Aegean Sea almost broken in two without any hope of bringing it back to light.
Dublin: Easter Uprising begins in April
Englishman William Tritton invents the Armed Chariot.
April: The United States enters war alongside the Entente.
November 7: the Russian Revolution begins.
In Ekaterinburg on July 17, Tsar Nicholas II and his family were murdered by the Bolsheviks.
On 4 November Austria-Hungary signed the armistice with Italy after the Italian victory at Vittorio Veneto.
On November 11, Germany signed the armistice with the Allies, ending World War I.
Austria and Great Britain allow women to vote.
The terrible Spanish influence is spreading in Europe and America, which will kill millions of people all over the world; among those illustrious, Guillaume Apollinaire, Egon Schiele and Gustav Klimt.
Treaty of Versailles laying down the conditions imposed on Germany by the Allies.
In Europe the workers' revolt called the Red Biennium breaks out.
June 28: Paris Conference begins, following which the Society of Nations was born on the initiative of US President Wilson.
In Milan the political movement of the Italian fighting Fasci was born on the initiative of Benito Mussolini.
April 15 opens the Paris Universal Exhibition
On July 2, the first modern airship flies, the Zeppelin.
The king of Italy Umberto I is assassinated by the anarchist Gaetano Bresci in retaliation to the events of Milan two years before. He succeeds him to the throne Vittorio Emanuele III.
Polisportiva S.S. Lazio is founded.
The Australian Commonwealth is officially born.
Nigeria becomes British protectorate.
President William McKinley is assassinated, Vice President Theodore Roosevelt succeeds him.
The Boxer Uprising is being cut off.
Guglielmo Marconi receives the first transatlantic radio transmission in Canada.
The Second Boer War ended with South Africa's victory.
On December 17, the Wright brothers made their first flight on an airplane successfully completed.
Albert Einstein publishes the theory of restricted relativity.
The Russian-Japanese War ends, through mediation by the President of the United States Theodore Roosevelt.
First Moroccan Crisis (Tangier Crisis)
On April 18, at dawn, the city of San Francisco was destroyed by an earthquake and the following fire; the victims were found to be 667, thousands missing.
In Milan the first Italian trade union organization of workers, called the General Confederation of Labour, was born.
Robert Baden-Powell founded the scautism.
July 26: the FBI is founded.
28 December: an earthquake of magnitude 7.1 hits the cities of Reggio Calabria, Messina and the surrounding area, causing a subsequent tidal wave. The victims were between 90,000 and 120,000.
On February 20 in the French newspaper Le Figaro Filippo Tommaso Marinetti publishes the Manifesto of Futurism.
Filippo Tommaso Marinetti who publishes in the "Le Figaro" a French newspaper the first manifesto of futurism
In Auvers-sur-Oise on July 29, 1890, the great painter Vincent van Gogh died of suicide.
June 2, 1894: He made his first appearance The Yellow Kid, considered the first comic book in history.
19 March 1895: the first film was filmed in France with the film entitled "The exit from the Lumière workshops," created by the Lumière Brothers, inventors of the first Film Projector.
In London in 1897 the Italian physicist William Marconi patented the radio.
1898: Pierre Curie and Marie Curie discover the radio.
1896: First Olympics of the Modern Age in Athens
On August 27, 1883, catastrophic eruption (with consequent tsunami) of the Krakatoa volcano in Indonesia, which produces one of the strongest sounds ever heard on the planet (warned up to Madagascar); thousands victims.
In 1883 Nietzsche published "Also Sprach Zarathustra" ("So spoke Zarathustra")
1886: Coca-Cola is invented by Dr. John Stith Pemberton, who used this drink as a medicine for his patients who were often affected by severe headaches and migraines.
In the same year the Benz Patent Motorwagen was invented as the first car.
The character of Sherlock Holmes was born with a red studio by Arthur Conan Doyle.
1889: Universal exhibition in Paris, the Eiffel Tower was inaugurated.
Pinocchio's character was born by Carlo Collodi.
The Kingdom of Italy, the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the German Empire form the Triple Alliance; the Triestino irredentist Guglielmo Oberdan ends up on the gallows.
1885: Italian troops engaged in East Africa occupy Massaua. It is the beginning of an Italian colonialist policy.
In Japan the judo is born, by Kanō Jigorō
In England the first national football championship begins.
In the United Kingdom the Inter-British Tournament was born, the first football competition for national teams (1883).
Franco-Prussian war: French defeat at Sedan on 1 September and abdication of Napoleon III with consequent proclamation of the Third Republic on 4 September; insurrection of Paris with the Commune, ended in January 1871.
The Great Depression begins (1873-1895).
1874: First exhibition of impressionists in Paris in the premises of photographer Nadar.
Berlin Congress in 1878.
On 20 September 1870 the targets opened a breach in Porta Pia in Rome and entered the city; the Papal State ceased to exist.
It begins a great emigration from the regions of the Italian North East to the Brazilian State of Rio Grande do Sul.
In this decade the Second Industrial Revolution takes off.
In 1878 the 6.35mm jack connector was invented, widely used today, to use it in the use of telephone control units.
Agostino Depretis, Italian Prime Minister of the Historical Left.
After the war, on December 6, 1865, with the ratification by Georgia, the thirteenth amendment of the Constitution enters into force, officially abolishing slavery in the United States of America.
Unity of Italy. On March 17, 1861 the Parliament proclaimed the Kingdom of Italy under Vittorio Emanuele. In the territories of the former Kingdom of the Two Sicilies the phenomenon of brigandage was born.
1866: Austro-Prussian War or Third Italian War of Independence, with which the Kingdom of Italy obtains Veneto.
1864: the Committee of the Italian Association for the relief of the wounded and the sick in war is founded in Milan, which will later become the Red Cross.
The First Transcontinental Railroad (USA) was built between 1863 and 1869.
James Clerk Maxwell publishes his equations that determine the relationship between magnetism and electricity and shows that light is a form of electromagnetic radiation.
Gregor Mendel formulates the laws of Mendel, bases of genetics.
Dmitri Mendeleev develops the periodic table.
Unification of Italy under King Vittorio Emanuele II of Savoia.
In 1863 the rules of football were codified in England, the Football Association was founded and the first teams were born.
King Vittorio Emanuele II of Savoia
Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom
Emperor Napoleon III of France
Queen Isabella II of Spain
Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America
Otto von Bismarck, Prime Minister Prussia
Charles III 1856-1889 children: Alberto ? - 1922
The novel Madame Bovary by Gustave Flaubert is published in volume.
Second Italian War of Independence between the Piedmontese allies of the French emperor Napoleon III and the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Since 1850 global temperatures have been rising again. The small ice age is over.
Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour
Kierkegaard publishes Aut aut and Fear and tremor.
1840: Alessandro Manzoni publishes the second edition of I promessi giusti.
1842: Giuseppe Verdi composes Nabucco.
1848: publication in London of the Communist Party Manifesto by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
January: riots are taking place in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, in particular in Palermo (12 January) and Naples (27 January).
4 March: promulgation of the Albertino Statute in the Kingdom of Sardinia, which becomes a constitutional monarchy.
March: In Milan there is a revolt against the Habsburg authorities (Five Days of Milan), as well as in Venice and in the other localities of Lombardo-Veneto.
First Italian Independence War: defeat of the Kingdom of Sardinia against the Austrian Empire to annex the Kingdom of Lombardy-Veneto. (the final phase of the War will take place in March 1849)
The Railway Mania breaks out in the United Kingdom.
1830: birth of the State of Belgium
Giuseppe Mazzini, in exile in Marseille, founded the movement of Giovine Italia.
The first Papal Credit Institute, the Cassa di Risparmio di Roma, was founded in Rome.
In the Kingdom of Sardinia feudalism is abolished.
1837: in Naples the poet Giacomo Leopardi dies in a state of misery.
The composer Vincenzo Bellini died in Catania at the age of 34.
1821: Napoleon Bonaparte dies exiled on the Island of Sant'Elena
1821: Greece becomes a monarchy.
1822: Galileo Galilei's Dialogues are removed from the index of forbidden books (Index librorum prohibitionrum) of the Catholic Church.
1822: there is an eruption of Vesuvius of Plinian type, similar to that which occurred in 79 A.D.
The first edition of the Promessi Sposi di Manzoni has been completed.
In Britain the design style of the gardens called 'gardenesque' is imposed, a term coined by John Claudius Loudon.
In Great Britain the first railway for passenger transport is opened.
George III of the United Kingdom, King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
George IV of the United Kingdom, King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Louis XVIII of France, King of France.
Charles X of France, King of France.
Francesco II of Habsburg-Lorena, Emperor of Austria.
Frederick William III of Prussia, King of Prussia.
Alexander I of Russia, Tsar of Russia.
Nicola I of Russia, Tsar of Russia.
Ferdinand VII of Spain, King of Spain
John VI of Portugal, King of Portugal.
Vittorio Emanuele I di Savoia, King of Sardinia.
Carlo Felice di Savoia, king of Sardinia.
Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies, king of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.
Francis I of the Two Sicilies, king of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.
Ranieri Giuseppe d'Hapsburg-Lorena, viceroy of the Kingdom of Lombardy-Veneto.
Francesco IV of Modena, Duke of Modena and Reggio.
Maria Luisa d'Hapsburg-Lorena, Duchess of Parma.
Ferdinand III of Tuscany, Grand Duke of Tuscany.
Leopold II of Tuscany, Grand Duke of Tuscany.
James Monroe, President of the United States of America
John Quincy Adams, President of the United States of America
Andrew Jackson, President of the United States of America
War of 1812: A second war breaks out between the United States and Great Britain.
Birth of Cavour's Camillo Benso.
1814: With the fall of the Empire of Napoleon the Kingdom of Italy is dissolved. The Austrian army occupies the Lombard-Veneto, and is annexed to the Habsburg Empire.
Congress of Vienna (1815): The era of Restoration in Europe begins.
1816: The Kingdom of the Two Sicilies is born.
Arthur Wellesley the Duke of Wellington, who defeated Napoleon in the Battle of Waterloo
Napoleon constitutes the Italian Republic, the capital of which is Milan.
Napoleon constitutes the Kingdom of Italy, of which the French emperor himself proclaims himself
Napoleon Bonaparte, emperor of the French.
Below is the list, divided by state of belonging, of astronauts and cosmonauts. For the list in chronological order of selection of astronauts see List of astronauts per year of selection. The list contains 608 people and is updated to 27 September 2023 (landing Sojuz MS-23). In italics are indicated the suborbital missions while in heaven the people in space.
In this list only the astronauts defined by FAI (that is those that have reached 100 km of altitude) have been inserted and therefore are not part of this list the following astronauts:
Roger Chaffee, who died on the launch ramp during an Apollo 1 mission drill;
Michael Smith, Gregory Jarvis and Christa McAuliffe, who died during the launch of the STS-51-L mission;
Virgin Galactic's SpaceShipTwo crew members during suborbital missions.
Soviet Union The cosmonauts Afanas'ev, Krikalëv, Manakov, Poljakov, Rjumin, Serebrov, Solov'ëv, Strekalov, Titov, Viktorenko and Volkov made the first flights in the Soviet Union period, so they are mentioned in the Soviet Union section although they also flew as Russian citizens.
List of astronauts per year of selection
History of astronauts by nationality
Space Flights with Human Crew
The lions are extinct in Egypt.
It is believed that on November 9, 1799 the French Revolution actually ended, when a successful coup put in the hands of Napoleon Bonaparte the control of France. (State coup of 18 brumaio)
1796: Napoleon takes command of the Italian Army, and in April the Italian Campaign begins. The French defeat the Austro-Piedmontese troops and conquer Piedmont, and in May they enter victorious Milan.
On 17 October 1797, France and Austria signed the Treaty of Campoformio establishing the Austrian recognition of the Cisalpine Republic and the annexation of the territories of the Republic of Venice to the Habsburgs.
Luigi Galvani, Italian physiologist and anatomist
End of the American War of Independence, the Constitution of the United States of America is written.
On 19 October 1783 the first human balloon flight was made in Paris, which owes its name to its inventors, the Montgolfier brothers.
1786: abolition of torture and death penalty in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany.
1788: Britain founds a penal colony in New South Wales in Australia.
1789: A series of popular revolts broke out in Paris and other French cities that started the French Revolution.
Giacomo Casanova, writer and...
William Pitt the Young, famous British statesman
Frederick II of Prussia called "the great"
April 29, 1770 - British Captain James Cook with HM Bark Endeavour lands on the east coast of the Australis Earth in the area he called Botany Bay.
On 4 July 1776 the Declaration of Independence of the United States of America was ratified in Philadelphia.
According to Walt W. Rostow's chronology, the take-off of the Industrial Revolution takes place in England (1760 - 1780).
Treaty of Paris... ends the Seven Years' War.
Under the Treaty of Versailles (1768), the Republic of Genoa gives possession of Corsica to France.
North America British: War of the Rules of Procedure
Pope Boniface VIII indicates the first jubilee of the Catholic Church.
In England the book The Crafte of Numbynge, which explains the art of calculation, is published.
Giovanni Boccaccio was born in July 1313
On February 8, 1340 Edward III of England, defeated Philip VI at Crecy, proclaimed himself legitimate king of France, for he was the son of Isabella, daughter of Philip IV, king of France.
Black plague rages in Europe.
Saint Bridget leaves Sweden on a pilgrimage to Rome to try to bring the pope back from the Avignon captivity
1377: End of Avignon captivity
1379: The first European fireworks fired in Vicenza.
1750 December 12, Linda Lacerenza discovers herself lesbian
1732: Laura Bassi is the first woman to teach at a university
1736: Euler publishes Mechanica, sive motus scientia analytice exposa
1733-1738: Polish War of Succession
Charles VI of Habsburg, Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire
Louis XV of France, King of France
Anna I of Russia, Empress of Russia
Robert Walpole, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
Failure of the Law system in France.
The inventor Bartolomeo Cristofori invented the piano.
Pietro Micca (died 1706 in defense of Turin)
Linnaeus was born in 1707 in Råshult
Russia: After the death of the Patriarch Hadrian (October 16), Tsar Peter abolished the Patriarchate of Moscow.
He is known for being the inventor of dynamite and the creator and founder of the Nobel Prize.
In 1850 the young Alfred Nobel arrived in Paris, where he attended the laboratories of the scientist Théophile-Jules Pelouze and met Professor Ascanio Sobrero,
Back in Europe, in 1856, Nobel patented a series of improvements for bombs. He invented a first relatively safe detonator in 1863, while two years later he invented the first sandblasting cap. Unfortunately, on September 3, 1864, Emil, the younger brother, lost his life during a serious explosion in the workshop shed. Other less serious incidents with nitroglycerin occurred in the following months, until Alfred, in a plant in Geesthacht, Germany, succeeded in perfecting the use of the same, through an inert powder composed of fossil flour and, later, even of simple compressed sawdust, thus making the explosive more maneuverable, solid and stable. Thus dynamite was born, whose patent was deposited only at the beginning of 1867. The invention allowed him, in a short time, to open societies and laboratories in about twenty foreign countries, among which one of the largest factories in Italy, at the Valloja resort of Avigliana, near Turin. The French socious man was the most representative of the French Barbabile and his political representative in Barbín was the most representative in France, and the most representative of the French Barbabile, and the most representative of the most representative in Italy.
In 1887 he patented the balistite, the basis of the future cordite. In 1875 he invented gelignite, an explosive gelatinous explosive even more stable and powerful than dynamite, and in 1887 he patented the balistite, the basis of the future cordite.
A critical advisor on the use of dynamite for war purposes was his pacifist secretary Bertha von Suttner.
In 1888 Alfred's brother, Ludvig, died while in Cannes. By mistake, a French newspaper published the obituary of Alfred's death, harshly condemning him for the invention of dynamite. The title of the obituary recited The merchant of death died (Le marchhand de la mort est mort), continuing then: "Alfred Nobel, who became rich finding the way to kill as many people as possible as quickly as possible, died yesterday."
As a result of this episode, Nobel would begin to worry about how he would be remembered after his death and would therefore have gained the will to leave a better legacy. Therefore, on November 27, 1895 he signed his famous testament, with which he instituted those awards that became known as Nobel Prize winners. The estimated heritage of Alfred Nobel was around thirty million Swedish crowns, corresponding to about 180 million euros today.
The Last Years and Death
In recent years Alfred Nobel was sincerely tormented in conscience by the possible military and destructive applications of his discoveries. In this contradictory context he instituted the Nobel Prize, which made his name immortal, to stimulate with the award the research in the fields that illuminate and help the human being to live worthily. He also had literary desires: he wrote in fact a number of poems and dramas and also thought to devote himself exclusively to this activity. He never married; however, from about 1876 his great love was the Austrian Sofie Hess.
In 1896 Nobel died of a brain hemorrhage in Italy, in his villa on the Ligurian Riviera, precisely in Sanremo, later known as the Nobel Villa. His body was then returned to Sweden, where he rested at the Norra begravningsplatsen, Stockholm cemetery.
Paola Maria Delpiano, Trip around the Dynamite Nobel, Editris, Turin, 2011, ISBN 978-88-89853-20-7.
Individual sport is a competitive, amateur or professional category, in which the athlete competes on his own.
In an individual discipline, the athlete competes individually, with the results obtained ascribable to the personal role instead of collective: there are also variants of couples, such as double in tennis and badminton. A plurality of athletes can also compete together, forming a team as happens (among others) in cycling. Examples of solitary sports include disciplines with racket, fight, running (royalty and motor racing), light athletics, heavy athletic, swimming and gymnastics: also fall under the definition some of the so-called extreme activities, such as climbing and water specialties, as well as practices related to the playful aspect including darts, bowling and bocce.
While competing alone in the field, the athlete can follow a training conducted by the coach.
Olympic sports are marked with the symbol:
Wheelchair tennis
1290: Death of the "Beatrice dantesca" (real name Bice) that took Dante himself to dedicate himself to the study of philosophy. Later (1293-1294) Dante will write the work "Vita Nuova," whose title was the fruit of the spiritual and literary renewal of the poet.
Around 1230 Walther von der Vogelweide died, a poet in the Middle-High German.
1221: the defeat of Christians in Damietta puts an end to the Fifth Crusade.
1223: written and definitive approval of the Franciscan Rule.
1226: The Teutonic Knights receive from the Duke Corrado of Masovia (dependent of the Grand Duke of Poland) a request for help to subdue and Christianize the prudes, the inhabitants of Prussia. The campaigns will lead to the formation of the State of the Teutonic Knights.
1227: Emperor Frederick II, at the last moment, tries to start a crusade (which he had promised for many years) but an epidemic among the troops forces him to postpone it. Not believing him, Pope Gregory IX excommunications him.
1228: Frederick II, although excommunication, undertook the Crusade and went to Palestine
On February 11, the Emperor concludes with the Sultan al-Malik al-Kamil an agreement that allows Christians to enter Bethlehem, Nazareth, Jerusalem and some other sacred places, marking the end of the unbloody Sixth Crusade.
On March 18 Frederick entered the Basilica of the Holy Sepulchre to be crowned King of Jerusalem by the local patriarch. But he was excommunicated, so he took the crown and put it on his head with his hands.
On 12 April the Kingdom of France (directed by Bianca di Castile, mother of the young King Louis IX "the Saint") and the County of Toulouse (directed by Raimond VII) made a pact in the Treaty of Paris: the County was annexed to the Kingdom together with the engagement of a brother of the King, Alfonso Count of Poitou, with the daughter of the Count, Joan of Toulouse.
Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire Frederick II
Ermanno di Salza, Grand Master of the Order of Teutonic Knights
1213: The Battle of Muret, watershed in the history of the Crusade Albigese, leads to the temporary defeat of the heretical faction (Peter II King of Aragon, who dies, and Raimond VI Count of Toulouse) against that of the Crusaders (Simon of Montfort and Philip II Augustus).
1214: With the Battle of Bouvines Philip Augustus defeated the Emperor Otto IV, an ally of John the King of England.
1215: as a result of the Battle of Bouvines Ottone IV is deposed by his vassals, who elect Frederick II of Swabia in his place, who immediately promises to be crusaded (the Crusade will take place only in 1228).
1215: In June, as a result of the Battle of Bouvines, King John, to whom only Aquitaine remained on the continent, was forced by the English barons, who took advantage of the moment of weakness of the Sovereign, to grant the Magna Charta Libertatum.
1215: Innocent III presides over the Lateran Council IV, which ends with the proclamation, on December 14, of the Fifth Crusade.
1219: St. Francis visits Damietta, while the siege of the Islamic city by the Crusaders is underway, to convert Muslims. After a failed reception by the Sultan, he returns to Europe.
Pope Innocent III (died 1216)
Simon of Montfort, French knight, participated in the Fourth Crusade and directed the operations of the Crusade Albigese until his death in 1217
Raimondo VI Count of Toulouse, main exponent of the heretical faction in the Crusade Albigese
1202-1205: Philip Augustus, at war against John Plantagenet, conquered Normandy first and then the whole valley of the Loire.
1204: Innocent III orders his missionaries led by Peter of Castelnuovo to force the politicians of Occitania to expel all the Cathars.
1208: as a result of the killing, in January, of Peter of Castelnuovo, which leather is pointed at the Count of Toulouse Raimondo VI, Innocent III indicates the Crusade Albigese against the Cathar heresy.
Crusade Albigese: between the summer of 1209 and that of the following year the crusaders, led by Simone of Montfort, assault and destroy the cities of Occitania, massacred or expelled their inhabitants (Béziers and Narbona in July 1209, Carcassonne in August, Albi, Castelnaudary, Castres, Fanjeaux, Limoux, Lumbers and Montréal in autumn, Bram in March 1210, Minerve in June).
Simone di Montfort, French leader of the Albigese Crusade
Philip Augustus king of France
John Plantagenet, known as the Landless
On July 15, 1410 the famous Battle of Grunwald began.
1415: Unexpected English victory near Azincourt. An important part in the scenery of the War of the Hundred Years.
1420: Portuguese conquest of Madeira.
Beginning of the works of the Malatestian Library
Cosimo de' Medici comes into possession of the hermetic texts (consisting of Corpus Hermeticum) of Ermete Trismegisto, destined to have a fundamental importance on the history of the Renaissance thought of the European West. He instructs Marsilio Ficino to translate them from Greek into Latin. These ends the translation in 1463, the same year in which Thomas Benci finishes translating them into vulgar Italian. The Latin translation of Ficino will be printed only in 1471.
During the Mass in the cathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence, a conspiracy aimed at overthrowing the Medici government (known as the conspiracy of the Pazzi, by the family that organized it) ends not so much with the death of Lorenzo the Magnificent (primary objective) but with that of his brother Giuliano de' Medici. The failure of the conspiracy will follow a series of trials aimed at executing all those who were part of it.
On October 12, 1492, Christopher Columbus reached the coasts of the continent that would then be called America, still popularly considered a territory of the Indies. It is the discovery of America.
1492: He is elected to the pontifical throne Rodrigo Borgia, under the name of Pope Alexander VI. Unlike all the popes elected up to that time, he publicly recognizes his children, giving them titles and power: John (Duke of Gandia), Caesar (who will become the Duke of Valentinois, from whom he will take the nickname of Duke Valentino), Goffredo (duke of Squillace, who will marry Sancia d'Aragona, illegitimate daughter of the king of Naples Alfonso II) and Lucrezia (pawn and political instrument, will be given as wife to three men only for the purpose of alliance: Giovanni Sforza, Alfonso d'Aragona, brother of Sancia, and Alfonso I d'Este).
Leonardo da Vinci paints the Mona Lisa.
1503: Pope Alexander VI dies leaving the papal throne to Giuliano II della Rovere, who will take the name of Julius II (also called the pope "warrior").
1509: At the death of his elder brother Arthur, Henry became king of England under the name of Henry VIII Tudor.
Decades of synoptic gospels according to the hypothesis of the exegetical school of Madrid.
In 64 the great fire of Rome took place, which many suspect was caused by Emperor Nero.
In 64, Nero accuses Christians of being guilty of the fire, triggering violent persecution.
In 65 Senator Gaio Calpurnio Pisone, along with the tribune Subrio Flavio and the centurion Sulpicius Aspro, leads a conspiracy against Nero, which however fails and is discovered.
In 68 Nero, deposed from the Senate, flees and commits suicide in the villa of a freeman.
Year of the four emperors: after Nero's death, a civil war began in Rome. From 68 to 69, Galba, Oton, Vitellio and finally Vespasiano happened.
9 June 68 Rome - Death of Nero Roman Emperor
20 December 69 - Rome, Vespasian becomes Roman Emperor
In Ifriquya there is the dynasty of the Zirids
Ghaznavid dynasty in Afghanistan
Beginning of the Fatimid period in Egypt (end in 1711). The capital of Fatimids is moved to Cairo. The city reaches 500 000 inhabitants between the 10th and 11th centuries.
The Fatimids dedicate Syria, occupy Damascus but clash with the Byzantine reconquest of John I Zimisce and the Arab divisions.
Russian-Byzantine War: the Russian army of Sviatoslav after having fought the Bulgarians on behalf of the Byzantines, devastated the surroundings of Constantinople in 970. Then besieged Edirne but are defeated by Barda Sclero during the Battle of Arcadiopol. The army is subsequently driven out of the Balkans by a land and river operation of John I Zimisce, which annexes Eastern Bulgaria (971)
Following the Embassy of Liutprand of Cremona and the negotiations of Pandolfo Testadiferro in Constantinople, basileus John I Zimisce and Emperor Otto I conclude peace in southern Italy. The Byzantine emperor recognizes the dignity of Otto, and the future Otto II will marry a Byzantine princess.
Battle of Tourtour of the Provencals against the fortress of Frassineto, a sarracino shelter.
Fatimid caliph builds an observatory in Cairo where Ibn Yunus works
983. A revolt of pagan western Slavs temporarily puts an end to the attempt to convert to Christianity the peoples assigned to the east of the Elbe River, also forcing the religious to abandon the monasteries located there.
Kiev's Rus' converts to Byzantine Christianity.
In 996 the king of France died Ugo Capeto, founder of the Capetian dynasty. His successor was Robert II
People around the world were terribly shaken by the belief of the end of the world that was to take place, according to some, in the early 1000s.
Schism between the Christian and Orthodox Catholic Church (1054)
1183: with the Peace of Constance Federico Barbarossa officially recognizes the judicial autonomy of Italian municipalities
1187: Saladin wins the Battle of Hattin against the Christians of the Holy Land and robs them of the control of all Palestine. This event will lead to the death by despondency of Pope Urban III and the indication of a new Crusade by his successor Gregory VIII.
1189-1191: Third Crusade against the Turks led by Saladin
Saladin, Sultan of Egypt and great military strategist
Last period of the literary activity of Chrétien de Troyes. Ended The Knight of the Carretta and The Knight of the Lion, composes Perceval or the tale of the Grail, remained unfinished at his death (1190 cca.).
Violent earthquake on June 29, 1170 in the eastern Mediterranean (Syria, Lebanon, central-southern Turkey) with waves of magnitude 7,3-7,7 Richter. There are approximately 110,000 victims.
1176: the Battle of Legnano marks the final defeat of Federico Barbarossa against the Lombard League.
Federico Barbarossa, emperor of the Holy Roman Empire
Walther von der Vogelweide was born around 1170, a poet in the Middle-High German (d.1230 ca.).
1161-1162: the city of Milan is besieged and then razed to the ground by Emperor Frederick Barbarossa.
1164: the Veronese League is founded.
1166: Henry II Plantagenet conquers Brittany.
1167: the Cremonese League was founded, which in the same year merged with the Veronese League, giving life to the Lombard League.
1168: the city of Alexandria is founded in anti-imperial function.
1169: Shirkuh, general of Sultan Nurandino, is sent to free Egypt from dynastic strife, where he imposes himself as a monarch.
Federico Barbarossa, emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
Sant'Ubadlo dies from Gubbio at dawn on 16 May 1160
1152: Federico Barbarossa is elected king of Germany.
1154: Federico I Barbarossa decides to raze the city of Gubbio to the ground, but is stopped by the Bishop and today holy Ubaldo Baldassini recognizing the holiness on earth immediately.
1154-1155: Barbarossa promulgated the Authentic Habitat, a document with which it gave various privileges to university students, and considered an implicit recognition of the University of Bologna.
1155: Federico I Barbarossa is crowned Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire by Pope Hadrian IV in exchange for the arrest and killing at the stake of the 'heretic' preacher Arnaldo da Brescia.
1158: in the Diet of Roncaglia Federico Barbarossa forbids the municipalities any appropriation of gifts.
August 1158: Refoundation of Lodi by Federico Barbarossa, after the destruction of the old city (Laus Pompeia) by the Milanese.
1154: death of Ruggero II of Sicily
Second crusade, ended with the defeat of Damascus.
Pietro Bernardo Paganelli of Montemagno, Calci is elected Pope Eugenio III,
Pope Honorius II, Lamberto, known as Scannabecchi (Fiagnano, February 9, 1060 - Rome, February 13, 1130), was Pope from 1124 to his death in 1130.
1094: the Cathedral of Sant'Agata is inaugurated, the first temple in Arab-Norman style
1096-1099: The First Crusade takes place.
1099: Pope Paschal II demolishes the Mausoleum of Domizi Enobarbi, where the Roman Emperor Nero was buried, whom he considered the Antichrist. In his place he built the church of Santa Maria del Popolo.
Foundation of the Diocese of Catania and start of the construction site of the Cathedral of Sant'Agata
Norberto di Prémontré (Saint for the Catholic Church)
Conquest of Sicily by Altavilla
Austria (in German: Österreich, ; in Bavarian: Ésterreich), officially Republic of Austria (in German: Republik Österreich; ), is a federal republic composed of nine Länder, member of the European Union, located in Central Europe. It borders Switzerland (Canton of Grisons, Canton of St. Gallen) and Liechtenstein to the west, Slovenia and Italy (Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trentino-Alto Adige, Veneto) to the south, Hungary to the east, Slovakia to the north-east, Germany (Bavaria) and the Czech Republic to the north.
With the capital city of Vienna on the banks of the Danube River, its modern origins date back to the 9th century, when the territory of Upper and Lower Austria became more and more populated. The name Ostarrichi is attested for the first time in an official document since 996 of Otto I. Since then this word evolved into Österreich.
It is a representative parliamentary democracy (although the President is directly elected by the citizens) and is one of the six European countries that has declared permanent neutrality, as well as among the few countries in the world that includes the concept of eternal neutrality in its constitution. It has been a member of the United Nations since 1955 while entry into the European Union took place on 1 January 1995.
The first written mention of the name "Austria" is found in the work Historia Langobardorum by Paolo Diacono and dates back to 796. The name Österreich is derived from the old German Ostarrîchi (oriental kingdom). The name was Latinized as Austria (in the meaning of eastern territory, as well as the Lombard Austria, and not southern as for example the southern term) and Reich which could also mean empire, at least in the context of the Austro-Hungarian Empire or the Holy Roman Empire, although not in the context of the modern Republic of Österreich. The term probably originates from a vernacular translation of the medieval Latin name of the region: Marchia orientalis, which also translates as "oriental mark" or "eastern boundary," as it is situated on the eastern edge of the Holy Roman Empire, which was also reflected in the name Ostmark.
However, Friedrich Heer, one of the most important Austrian historians in the 20th century, stated in his book Der Kampf um die österreichische Identität (the struggle on Austrian identity), that the Germanic form Ostarrîchi was not a translation of the Latin word, but both the result of a much older term dating back to the Celtic languages of the region: more than years ago, the majority of the country was called Norig by the Celtic population (Hallstatt culture); no- or nor- meant "east" or "oriental," while rig was related to the modern German reich: kingdom (among other things). Consequently Norig would mean Ostarrîchi and Österreich, as well as Austria: the Celtic name would later be Latinized in Noricum, at the time of the Roman conquest of the region.
The official name is Republic of Austria (Republik Österreich). After the fall of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1918 it was originally known as Republik Deutschösterreich (Republic of German Austria), but was forced to change its name to the Republic of Austria in 1919 by the Treaty of Saint-Germain. The name was changed again during the Austro-fascist regime (1934-1938) in the Federal State of Austria (Bundestaat Österreich), followed by the Ostmark of post-Anschluss Nazi Germany; but restored to the previous version after having regained the independence and birth of the Second Republic (Zweite Republik, 1955 - present).
Anciently inhabited by the Celts and the Illyrians in the eastern part, the advance of the Celts greatly reduced the presence of the Illyrians who repaired mainly on the Adriatic coast. It was conquered by Romans and for centuries was part of the Roman Empire. Longobards, Ostrogoths, Bavari, Alemanni and Franchi occupied the territory that was Germanized. Austria ended up under the rule of the Babenbergs from the 10th to the 13th century. The Babenbergs were then barefooted by the Habsburgs, whose line continued to govern Austria until the 20th century.
Shortly before the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, the Austrian Empire was founded (1804), which was transformed in 1867 into the dual monarchy of Austria-Hungary. After the defeat of the central powers in the First World War, the Empire was divided into several independent states, while other extended territories were transferred to other winning powers of the conflict, thus leading Austria to obtain today's form. In 1918 Austria became a republic, under the name of the Republic of German Austria (Republik Deutschösterreich), although it was forced to change its name to the Republic of Austria. Austria maintained democratic-representative institutions until 1934, when the Federal Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuß after a short authoritarian government (he dissolved the parliament in 1933, following the fascist example) was killed in a Nazi attack aimed at the annexation of Austria to Nazi Germany.
Austria was finally annexed to Germany in 1938 (the so-called Anschluss), although a part of the Austrians was not enthusiastic about it, to what writes a witness like the Fascist Manlio Morgagni. After the annexation, this Reichsgau saw the creation of several Nazi concentration camps, of which the largest was the concentration camp in Mauthausen.
At the end of World War II, after the Nazi defeat, Austria was occupied by the Allies until 1955, when the State became independent again, provided it remained neutral. Despite this, after the collapse of communism, in Eastern Europe, Austria was increasingly involved in European issues: in 1995 it became part of the European Union and in 1999 the euro area.
Austria is a state located in central Europe on the northern side of the eastern part of the Alps; in particular, it includes part of the Rhetic Alps and the whole group of the Eastern Alps (Austrian Alps, Tauern Alps, Norse Alps and Carnic Alps). Three-fifths of the country are occupied by Alpine territory. Moving eastwards, the altitude of the eastern Alps gradually drops towards the Carpathians and the Hungarian plain.
It borders to the north with the Czech Republic (), to the north-west with Germany (), to the east with Slovakia () and Hungary, to the south-west with Italy and to the south-east with Slovenia, to the west with Switzerland and Liechtenstein. Kleinwalsertal and the country of Jungholz can be reached only from Germany. The country of Samnaun (Switzerland) up to was reachable only from Austria. The Austrian territory extends in an east-west direction and in a north-south direction. The total area of the country is equal to and without counting the aquatic surface; the country has no outlets on the sea.
The most western point of the country is located at , near the Rhine River near the municipality of Bangs in the federate state of Vorarlberg. It should be noted however that there is no precise agreement defining the international borders between Austria, Switzerland and Germany within the mirror of Lake Constance. The easternmost point of the country is in the territory of the municipality of Deutsch Jahrndorf in the federate state of Burgenland. The northernmost point of the country is the torrent Neumühlbach () near Rottal, Upper Austria, although the northernmost town is the municipality of Haugschlag, Upper Austria (), while the southernmost point () is located in the Alps of Kamnik and Savinja, in Carinthia.
The territory is largely covered with mountain ranges. The main chains are: Venoste Alps, and North Norse Alps, High Tauern with the highest peak in the country: the Großglockner, and the Salzburg Alps. Other important peaks are the White Ball, the Wildspitze and the Großvenediger.
Much of the territory of the country () is included in the basin of the Danube River and therefore of the Black Sea. Except for the Vorarlberg () which is included in the Rhine basin and therefore of the North Sea and a small part of the Bohemian Massif () which is tax of Elba through the river Vltava.
Austria is crossed by the Danube that flows into the country for about eastwards. The Danube enters the Austrian territory at the Bavarian town of Passau (Passau) immediately after the confluence with the rivers Eno (Inn) and Ilz, and comes out, after crossing the capital, and has marked for a short stretch the border between Austria and Slovakia, west of Bratislava. They are tributaries of the Danube (listed from west to east):
the rivers Lech and Inn () (which cross the Tyrol), the latter has as tributary the Salzach (which has as basin much of the Salzburgese).
the rivers Ager, Traun, Enns, Ybbs, Erlauf, Traisen, Wien, Caris and Fischa passing through the territories of Styria, Upper Austria, Lower Austria and Vienna.
the river Drava (), which was born in Italy near Dobbiaco/Toblach, then crosses part of Carinthia and flows into the Danube outside the Austrian territory.
the Wall (), which crosses most of Styria, including Graz and flows into the Drava in Croatian territory.
The climate in the mountainous regions is mainly of alpine type, being the mainly mountainous territory, with mostly cool and windy summers and cold and rigid winters. The vegetation is very luxuriant with coniferous woods and broadleaf trees. To the east, in the pannonian plain and along the Danube valley, the climate shows continental characteristics with warmer temperatures and less rain than in the alpine areas. To the south the region is characterized by a warm wind, called Föhn, which favors the cultivation of vine and fruit.
Global warming affects Austria in various ways. Austria's assessment report on climate change 2014 (Österreichscher Sachstandsbericht Klimawanddel 2014) provides the following results: in Austria, the temperature has increased by almost 2 °C in the period from 1880 to 2014. In the same period, the temperature has increased globally by only 0.85 °C. The measures taken so far by Austria have not covered the country's expected contribution to achieving the global target of 2 °C. In the 21st century, there can be expected an increase in precipitation in the winter semester and a decrease in the summer semester. The duration of the snowy mantle has been reduced in recent decades, especially at medium-high altitudes (about 1000 m). All glaciers measured in Austria have clearly lost area and volume in the period since 1980. For example, in the Southern Alps Ötztal, the largest contiguous glacier area in Austria, the glacier area has declined from 144.2 km2 in 1969 to 126.6 km2 in the period since 1980. All of the Alps have been hit by trees, with constant waterfalls and other climatic phenomena, the contigations are increasing in the contigational temperatures.
About 90% of the Austrian population is Bavarian, the remaining 10% comes mainly from the surrounding nations: Hungarians (who flowed there during the Austro-Hungarian Empire) and Slavs. The federal states of Carinthia and Styria host a significant Slovenian minority of about members, in the state of Burgenland there are a Croatian minority and a Hungarian.
Austria, consisting of nine federal states, is characterized by the uneven distribution of the population. The population density is low in the Alpine regions, while in the valleys of the Danube there are greater concentrations. About one fifth of the total population is concentrated in the urban area of Vienna, while other cities are small and hardly reach the inhabitants. Still high is the percentage of population living in rural villages. and tends to a progressive ageing. It is important the presence of foreign workers, mainly from the Balkan area and Turkey, although immigrants have had difficulty integrating in the Austrian area. .
Austrians 91.0%, Germans 1.0%, Bosnians 1,5%, Turks 1,5%, Serbs 1,5%, Romanians 1.3%, others 2.5%.
During the last forty years of the 20th century there has been a gradual reduction in the number of those who profess the Christian religion: Catholics represent 64% of the population in 2010 (there were 89% in 1951) and Protestants 4% (in 1962 6.2%). The Orthodox faithful represent 8.8% of the population in 2018. On the other hand, those who declare no religious membership have increased: in 2001 12% of Austrians do not declare any religious membership (they were 3.8% in 1962).
The Jews lived in the area that now forms the Republic of Austria for centuries. A large part of the Austrian Jewish community emigrated during the 1930s, and many of those who remained were killed during the Holocaust. In 1930 Austria hosted at least Jews and the persecutions survived only . The 2001 estimates speak of a small but expanding Jewish community (it welcomed numerous Russian and Ukrainian Israelites), including between the and the people. Islam, expanding as a result of the arrival of numerous immigrants, stood at 8% in 2016.
The official language, German is spoken by almost all residents. The mountainous nature of the land has led to the development of numerous dialects, all of which belong to the Austro-Bavarese group, with the exception of a dialect belonging to the group of Alemanni dialects in the Vorarlberg region. The Bavarian dialect is spoken in Tyrol and is also the mother tongue of many inhabitants of South Tyrol (South Tyrol), Italy.
Austria is a federal republic divided into nine federal states.
The Austrian Constitution (Österreichische Bundesverfassung) dates back to 1 October 1920.
Austria is composed of nine federal states (German: Bundesland, plural: Bundesländer) in turn divided into 84 Districts (Bezirk plurale Bezirke) and 15 Autonomous Cities (Statuttarstadt, plurale Statutarstädte). The 84 Districts are divided into municipalities (Gemeinde, plurale Gemeinden).
Lower Austria (the capital of St. Pölten)
The main cities are the capital of Vienna and the capitals of the other eight state states: St. Pölten, Linz, Salzburg (Salzburg), Innsbruck, Bregenz, Klagenfurt, Graz and Eisenstadt. Among the cities not the capital of the Bundesländer the most populous are Wels and Villaco (Villach).
Austria is a federal parliamentary republic. The Federal President (German: Bundespräsident) is elected every six years by direct universal suffrage. The President in turn appoints the Chancellor, an expression of the parliamentary majority; traditionally he is the leader of the relative majority party. The Austrian Parliament consists of two chambers, the Austrian Federal Council (Bundesrat), composed of 64 representatives of the federal states, depending on the population, and the Austrian National Council (Nationalrat) (the only Chamber with which the Executive Power retains the trust relationship), composed of 183 directly elected members.
School education is compulsory from 6 to 15 years. Primary School/Volksschule (6-10 years), Secondary School/Hauptschule or AHS-Unterstufe (10-14 years), Supplementary Year before High School/Polytechnische Schule (PTS) (14-15 years), Superiors/Upper level (15-18 years).
There are 22 public universities and 15 private universities throughout Austria. The oldest Austrian university and, in general, German-speaking countries is the University of Vienna, founded on March 12, 1365 by Duke Rodolph IV of Habsburg and the brothers Albert III of Habsburg and Leopold III of Habsburg, from which comes the additional name of Alma Mater Rudolphina. In Linz there is a young university with a linked campus (JKU).
Austria has a two-tier health system where citizens can receive public assistance, but they also have the possibility to take out additional private health insurance. Health care in Austria is universal for residents of Austria and for those from other EU countries.
The Austrian armed forces were born in 1955 as a result of the independence of the Second Republic of Austria. They count - men and have a mobilization of men.
The police forces in Austria are part of the Directorate-General for Public Security, a subdivision of the Federal Ministry of the Interior. The system of law enforcement was radically reformed in 2005, some police bodies were dissolved and their members merged into newly created entities. The 2005 reform led to the dissolution of the Bundesgendarmerie (Federal Gendarmery, born in 1849), the Bundessicherheitswachekorps (Federal Security Guard Corps) and the Kriminalbeamkorps (Investigative Corps); all merged into the federal police.
The Directorate-General for Public Security shall be responsible for:
Bundeskriminalamt: born in 2002, it is an office which primarily serves as coordination and investigation;
Bundespolizei (Federal Police): born in 2005 with the reform of the system, it is organized on a federal basis with nine commands, one for each federated State, which responds to the Ministry. It performs the normal functions of police including those of border control;
Gemeindesicherheitswache: is the municipal police of Austria;
Flugpolizei (Air Police): Air support unit during various operations (fire, rescue, illicit repression). It also carries out training activities;
Justizwache: manages prisons and inmates. Inside is established a special unit that takes the name of Justizwache Einsatz Gruppe.
The flag of Austria consists of three horizontal bands of equal size. The colours, starting from the top, are: red, white and red. This flag dates back to 1230. Together with the Danish flag it is considered among the oldest national symbols in the world. The current version was adopted on May 1, 1945.
The coat of arms of Austria has been in use since the end of World War I to symbolize the country after the fall of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The symbols of the past regime remain in the eagle, not bicephalus as in the Austro-Hungarian period, but with one head. One last change was made after the end of World War II, with the chains broken in symbol of liberation from the Nazi dictatorship.
The Parliament is bicameral and consists of the Nationalrat of 183 seats (national diet), whose members are directly elected by the people for a duration of 5 years and the Bundesrat (federal diet) representing, through some delegates, the nine Regions. From 1945 to 1970 Austria was governed by the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP), the Christian Democrat and then the Conservative. In 1970 the elections were won by the Austrian Social Democratic Party (SPÖ), led by Bruno Kreisky. The Social Democrats would dominate the Government for three decades, with the Chancellors Kreisky, Fred Sinowatz, Franz Vranitzky and Viktor Klima.
Following the social-democratic defeat in the elections of 3 October 1999 and the impossibility of forming a coalition with social-democratic leadership, on 4 February 2000 a right wing coalition was formed, consisting of the people and the liberals (FPÖ). However, after some internal turmoil over the party's politics and leadership, Federal Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel (ÖVP) announced on 9 September 2002 that there would be early general elections for the end of November. On 24 November, ÖVP won (42.3%) but did not obtain the absolute majority (79 seats out of 183). After the very long talks ("Sondierungsgespräche") held between ÖVP and the other major parties: FPÖ, SPÖ and Verdi. On 28 February 2003, the coalition between ÖVP and FPÖ was continued, again with Wolfgang Schüssel (ÖVP) as Federal Chancellor. Its Vice Chancellor was Herbert Haupt (FPÖ) until it was replaced by Hubert Gorbach (FPÖ) on 20 October 2003.
In the elections of 1 October 2006, the SPÖ passed (35.34% of the votes and 67 seats) the ÖVP (34.33% and 66 seats) and became Chancellor its leader Alfred Gusenbauer, although it had to bend to a great coalition, not having obtained the absolute majority. The difficult cohabitation of SPÖ and ÖVP led to the early political elections that were held in September 2008. From the ballot box a split country with no party able to form a stable government alone came out again. To be noted is the considerable increase of the two right parties, FPÖ and BZÖ, which, if not divided for reasons of personal contrasts, would have the same weight as the Social Democratic Party.
In 2008 the Austrian National Diet (183 seats) is composed as follows:
57 SPÖ (Social Democratic Party of Austria) (29.3%)
51 seats ÖVP (Austrian Popular Party) (26.00%)
34 FPÖ (Austrian Freedom Party) seats (17.5%)
21 Seats BZÖ (Alliance for the Future of Austria) (10.7%)
The SPÖ, although weakened by the results, was still the first party and the President of the Republic therefore conferred on Werner Faymann (SPÖ) the task of forming the new government. Josef Pröll (ÖVP) was appointed Vice Chancellor instead. The new cabinet is therefore a re-edition of the great coalition that ruled Austria since 2006. The 2009 regional elections in Carinthia confirmed the Austrian electorate's tendency to reward the two right-wing parties (especially the BZÖ) to the detriment of the two historic Austrian parties.
Austria, with its well-developed market economy and high quality of life (service to pregnant mothers and older people is one of the best at European level, the highest level of education, given the high literacy rate), is closely linked to the other economies of the European Union, especially the German economy. The slowdown in economic growth in Germany and the rest of Europe (following the 2009 crisis) and the world has affected Austria, slowing down its growth. However, the country has reacted well to the crisis and GDP is returning to growth.
It raises cattle and grows sugar beet, cereals and fruit trees. Celebrated all over the world is the sweet food sector, Sacher cake is the best known cake. Particularly developed is the cultivation of the vines with which are made excellent white wines, especially in Lower Austria, Burgenland and Styria. For a long time the steel and metallurgical sectors have represented a very important voice in the Austrian economy. In the regions of Upper Austria and Styria in particular many industries have arisen, facilitated by the wealth of mineral resources of the territory such as lignite, iron, lead, magnesite and the availability of energy resources, especially hydroelectric. So the industrial sector is limited territorially to the cities of Vienna, Linz and Graz.
The crisis in the sector in the seventies has increased the importance of new sectors: chemical, precision mechanics, optical equipment, textiles, which have specialized in very high quality productions. The tertiary sector employs almost 7 out of 10 Austrians contributing 71% to national GDP. The Austrian transport system adequately supports an internal and external trade flow (Italy, Germany, Switzerland the main trading partners), placing at its centre Vienna. From the capital, in fact, part of a branched complex of railway () and road () lines, built in the most absolute respect of the natural Austrian landscape. Very intense is also the river traffic that exploits the extension of the Danube. Very important in the economy of the country is tourism, both for the cities of art, Vienna, Linz and Salzburg in the first place, both for winter tourism, with renowned and modernly equipped places for alpine skiing. Of some importance also summer tourism, in the locations of the Carinian and Salzburg Lakes.
Austria is among the eleven countries that have adopted the euro as their national currency, already in 1999; the euro entered into circulation on 1 January 2002, replacing the Austrian shilling. Austria is one of the countries that has decided to have the reverse of the coins all different, like Italy.
The Austrian motorway network is not very extensive, also because of the Alpine territory on which the country develops. In particular there is no East-West crossroads, but four North-South routes connecting the country with the main neighbouring states (Italy, Germany and Slovenia). It follows that some neighbouring regions, such as North Tyrol, Salzburg and East Tyrol, are not connected by means of fast-travel roads. To circulate on the Austrian highways it is necessary to have a bottle available especially at the filling stations. The mark exists in three versions: for 10 days, two months or annual.
The first artistic testimonies went back to the sculptures and goldsmith's products of 780 A.D. preserved at the monastery of Kremsmünster. Since 1100 numerous castles and abbeys were erected on the Austrian territory by the Cistercians, but for the development of the art it will be necessary to wait for the affirmation of the Habsburgs, albeit under the initial influence of German and French. From the thirteenth century to the wooden sculpture was joined by the realistic stone, which had its center in Vienna at the construction sites of the cathedral of Santo Stefano.
If at the beginning of the fifteenth century the courteous Gothic, well represented by Han von Tübigen, was established, around the middle of the century there was a return of realism, whose best representatives were Conrad Laib for painting and Jacob Kaschauer for sculpture. In this very strong century were the Flemish influences. In the sixteenth century was imposed the naturalism of the Danubian School and the court of Maximilian I were joined by many German Renaissance artists, on whose works legacies the Italian derivation.
The seventeenth century is remembered for the valuable constructions of the Salzburg Cathedral, of important palaces and works of Baroque imprint, such as the Collegiate Church of Salzburg. The Baroque followed the neoclassicism and romance characterized by the recovery of different styles, including the Biedermeier. From the middle of the nineteenth century Vienna conquered a position of absolute foreground in the arts, justified by the flowering of rationalism and the avant-garde movement Secession Viennese, in the orbit of the Liberty. Even the expressionism and abstractism did proselytism in Austria. Important the experience of modern Austrian architecture. Among the prominent exponents of the Viennese secession period we remember Gustav Klimt (1862-1918).
Several sites in Austria have been listed on the UNESCO World Heritage List.
As for the past, sometimes, it is not easy to distinguish the contribution of Austrian literature clearly separated from German literature. It is enough to think in this regard that at the origins of German literature it is necessary to insert a work such as the Nibelunghi epic, born in an Austro-Bavarese environment. Moreover, in the Austrian territory, during the Middle Ages, the production of courteous lyrics was fertile, as well as from the seventeenth to the nineteenth century the strand of popular comedy spread, from which the genre of the magic charade originated.
Among the most famous Austrian writers are Franz Grillparzer, considered the greatest writer of Austrian literature, Hugo von Hofmannsthal, exponent of decadentism, Joseph Roth, singer of the finis Austriae, Arthur Schnitzler, Johann Nestroy, Robert Musil, exponent of modernism and author of the unfinished novel L'uomo senza qualità (1930-1942), Franz Werfel, author of the historical novel The forty days of Mussa Dagh (1933), Karl Kraus, Friedrich Torberg, Felix Mitterer, Felix Salten, Austro-Hungarian writer, known, in particular, for the novel for children Bambi, the life of a roe deer (1923), Thomas Bernhard, Peter Handke, Nobel Prize for Literature of 2019, Leo Perutz, Stefan Zweig. Among the modern and contemporary writers are mentioned Bertha von Suttner, winner of the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1905 and Elf Jeline Literature in 2004.
The liturgical rite was at the base of the theatre in Austria, which was organized around the Middle Ages. From the seventeenth century, the courts arranged theaters, in which there were permanent activities stable groups of actors. This was the origin of the 19th century stable theatres, places of diffusion of dramatic art, such as the Viennese Volkstheater. The tour companies, after a long period of uncertainty and precariousness, after the Second World War resumed momentum and momentum. Among the Austrian theatres, one of the oldest and most important is the Theater in der Josephstadt, founded in 1788.
Austria was also the home of several famous composers such as the brothers Joseph and Michael Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and father Leopold, all of the most important exponents of classical music; Franz Joseph Haydn, besides being an exponent of Viennese classicism, contributed to the birth of the symphony and the quartet of strings. In the 19th century the waltz with Johann Strauss (father), the Father of the waltz and Johann Strauss (son), the music of Franz Schubert, exponent of romantic music, the members of the Strauss family, and also Anton Bruckner and Gustav Mahler, exponents of the late-Romantic music, Hugo Wolf, Franz von Suppè, also known for the operetta Cavalleria pesica (1866); and is Austrian the famous song of Christmas Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht, known in Italy as the Astro of Civer, and Franz von Suppè, also known for the operat of the early 20th century.
Austria is the home of important philosophers and scientists including Sigmund Freud, Alfred Adler, Melanie Klein, Edmund Husserl, founder of phenomenology, Karl Popper, Paul Feyerabend, Ludwig Boltzmann, Christian Doppler, Ernst Mach, Kurt Gödel, Paul Ehrenfest, Wolfgang Pauli, Hermann Bondi, Erwin Schrödinger, Max Perutz, economist Joseph Schumpeter, and Konrad Lorenz, founder of etology. It has also developed here one of the most important schools of economic theory, called "austriaca," which was founded by Carl Menger and then developed by Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek. Among the most important philosophers of the 20th century we also mention one of the most important philosophers of the twentieth century.
The laws of Mendel (law of domination, law of segregation, law of independent assortment) and genetics, whose father is often considered Gregor Mendel (1822-1884).
1884: the first local anesthesia was performed by the Austrian ophthalmologist Karl Koller, who used cocaine as an anaesthetic drug for the first time.
1900: the discovery of blood groups by Austrian biologist Karl Landsteiner: the anniversary of his birth, June 14, is celebrated in the world with the World Day of Blood Donor.
The psychology and methods of the Viennese school: Sigmund Freud (founder of psychoanalysis) and author of The interpretation of dreams (1899), Alfred Adler and Viktor Frankl.
The physical phenomenon of the Doppler effect (1845), by Christian Doppler.
Quantum mechanics, Schrödinger's equation (1926) and Erwin Schrödinger's contribution to 20th century physics.
1912: the discovery of cosmic rays by Victor Franz Hess.
October 1, 1869: the Correspondenz-Karte, the world's first postcard, invented by Emanuel Herrmann, is issued by the post office of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
2 October 1991: Franz Viehböck is the first Austrian in space.
25 February 2013: TUGSAT-1 and UniBRITE-1 are launched, the first Austrian satellites.
In the mid-19th century the SMS Novara (1850) was the first Austrian ship to circumnavigate the Earth.
Among the various Austrian actors who distinguished themselves between the 20th and 21st centuries we mention Arnold Schwarzenegger, also political, and Christoph Waltz and between the actresses Hedy Lamarr and Romy Schneider, also known for the role of protagonist in the famous trilogy of films The Princess Sissi (1955), Sissi - The Young Empress (1956) and Destiny of an Empress (1957).
Some of the most important film directors in Austria are Fritz Lang and Michael Haneke.
ORF (Österreichischer Rundfunk/Austrian Television) is the Austrian national radio television, born in 1955. The ORF has a predominant role in the Austrian media: in fact Austria has been one of the last European countries, apart from Albania, to allow private television broadcasts. It collaborates with German public television ARD and ZDF. The ORF 1 and ORF 2 television channels are also received in South Tyrol, where a regional news service is broadcast, Südtirol Heute (South Tyrol today). The ORF networks are six radio networks and four television channels.
Due to its particular geographical position in the Alps, the most popular sport activity in the country is alpine skiing in ski resorts such as Kitzbühel, Soelden, Schladming, Lienz, Flachau, Saalbach-Hinterglemm, Sankt Anton, Nassfeld-Pramollo etc.: in this sport the Austrian national Alpine skiing championship takes place for total number of victories in the World Cup, both male and female, and is largely the first nation in the Olympic medal. Other disciplines of winter sports also have great following and tradition in Austria and among them: ski jumping (two of the locations where the historic tournament of the four trampolines is held annually are Austrian: Innsbruck and Bischofshofen), the Nordic combination and the snowboard. Austria has hosted the Winter Olympic Games twice, in 1964 and 1976: both editions took place in Innsbruck.
The first Olympic gold for Austria was won by Paul Neumann at the Olympic Games in Athens in 1896. The first Olympic medal for Austria was the silver medal won by Otto Herschmann in swimming at the Olympic Games in Athens in 1896.
The country's most famous football teams are Rapid Vienna, Sturm Graz and Red Bull Salzburg. In 2008 Austria, together with Switzerland, hosted the European football championship. Austria's national football team has, in particular, obtained a third place in the 1954 World Championship and Championship in the International Cup in the years 1931-1932. Among the great Austrian football champions we can remember Matthias Sindelar and Ernst Ocwirk, included in the list of the best footballers of the XX century IFPHS, respectively 22nd and fifty-nineth. And again Franz Binder, Hans Krankl and Walter Schachner, head of the Austrian national team is Anton Polster with 44 goals.
Every year the Tour of Austria takes place in the bike industry. The Giro d'Italia sometimes borders on Austrian territory and places the arrival of a stage there: the last time was in 2011 with a stop at the Großglockner.
With Austrian nationality runs the Formula 1 Red Bull Racing team. Among the many Austrian drivers who have competed in Formula 1 are the world champions Niki Lauda and Jochen Rindt and the driver Gerhard Berger. Austria annually hosts the Austrian Grand Prix.
The Austrian driver Rupert Hollaus was a class 125 world champion in 1954 riding an NSU. Austria annually hosts Austria's Motorcycle Grand Prix. The Austrian motorcycling company KTM participates in track racing both in the World Motorcycle and in the motorcycle championships derived from the series. In both cases it gets the most significant successes in the smaller Cilindrates Moto3 and Supersport 300. KTM has won further titles in the dirt racing such as the Motocross World Championships, Enduro and Motorally.
Among the Austrian desserts we mention the Sachertorte or Sacher cake, invented in Vienna in 1832, by the Austrian pastry chef Franz Sacher, in honor of Count Klemens von Metternich.
The Austrian television agency (ORF) enjoys a strong monopoly especially in the field of television broadcasting. The two ORF1 and ORF2 broadcasters were for a long time the only national programmes available in the country. Only with the advent of the liberalisation of the sector were the first private television stations born. To remedy this situation, some German broadcasters were able to bypass the issue by proposing Austrian "windows" on satellite programmes (in particular SAT.1, RTL and PRO7). The first public programme, ORF1, presents a generalist programming. It collaborates with the Swiss and Germanic sisters (SRF and ARD) for the production of some programs that are transmitted to unified networks in the German-speaking area. The programming of ORF2 offers in particular regional news broadcast by the nine Länder that make up Austria, as well as an edition specially designed for the Autonomous Province of South Tyrol in Italy.
The Austrian mint (Münze Österreich), which deals with the minting of Austrian coins, is one of the oldest: its establishment dates back to 1194 at the time of the Duke of Austria Leopold VI of Babenberg.
Line of succession to the throne of Austria-Hungary
City title in Austria
Austrian website card Travel Secure - Site curated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and ACI
Austria on Travel around the World - Site curated by the Association of Official Delegates of Foreign Tourism in Italy
Arts - human activities related to aesthetic creation
Arts (Mobile appendices) of the human and animal body in general
Arts Russian urban settlement of the Sverdlovsk Oblast
Arts - Variant of the personal name of person Aarti
Pope Benedict IV (900) is elected.
Ludovico the Blind comes down to Italy and is proclaimed king (900).
Ludwig the Blind is crowned emperor by Pope Benedict IV (901).
The Arab general Isam al Jawlani, in agreement with the Emir of Cordova, conquers the city of Palma de Mallorca, starting the period of Arab domination over the Balearic Islands that will last about three centuries (902).
Sergio III is consecrated as 119th pope of the Catholic Church (904).
Discovery of the Andromeda galaxy by Al-Sufy (905).
The collapse of the Tang dynasty in China and the beginning of the period of the five northern dynasties and the ten southern kingdoms (907).
21 February 891: Guido II of Spoleto, pro-grandson of Charlemagne, becomes emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. With him begins the dynasty of the Guidoni.
November 894: Death of Guido II of Spoleto. He succeeds his son Lamberto II, whose title of emperor is contested by the King of France Orientalis, Arnolfo of Carinthia.
15 October 898: Death of Lamberto II. Arnolfo officially becomes emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
8 December 899: Death of Arnolfo. The title of emperor remains vacant until 901, when it will be assigned to Ludovico the Blind.
891: The Vikings from the Kingdom of Denmark invade Lotaringia, but King Arnolfo manages to drive them out.
894: Arnolfo descends to Italy, where Emperor Guido II of Spoleto was, and conquers Milan and the capital, Pavia. Here he is crowned king of Italy.
8 December 899: Death of Arnolfo. Ludovico IV the Child succeeds him as king of France Orientalis, Ludovico the Blind as king of Italy and Sventibaldo as king of Lotaringia. Meanwhile Pavia and Milan rebel.
893: King Oddone suffers a conspiracy from Folco the Venerable (helped by Arnolfo), which leads to the coronation of Charles the Simple as king of France Occidentalis. Thus begins a war between the two.
897: Charles the Simple recognizes himself as a rebel and ends the civil war with Oddone, who forgives him and appoints him his successor.
3 January 898: Oddone dies and Charles the Simple succeeds him.
899: Carlo il Semplice invades France Orientalis, reaching Aachen. He tries to take possession of Lotaringia (of which he will become king in 911), but is driven away by Sventibaldo, the king of Lotaringia.
894: The Bulgarians, led by the Tsar of Bulgaria Simeon, conquer the Balkans and begin to invade the imperial territory of Leo VI.
895: The courtier Scillai tries a conspiracy against the emperor, but he is discovered and executed.
891: The Venetian hinterland is devastated by the descent of the Hungarians. After having managed to hit the Duchy also plundering some coastal localities, they pointed towards the capital but, due to their inexperience at sea, were rejected by a fleet set up by the Doge, Pietro Tribune.
6 October 891: Death of Pope Stephen V. Formoso succeeds him.
4 April 896: Death of Formoso. Bonifacio VI succeeds him.
26 April 896: Death of Boniface VI. Stephen VI succeeds him.
14 August 897: Death of Stephen VI. Romano succeeds him.
November 897: Death of Romano. Theodore II succeeds him.
December 897: Death of Theodor II. John IX succeeds him.
880: Carlo il Grosso, returning from Ravenna, where he had been elected king of Italy, made an alliance with Louis the Younger and Charles II, the two kings of France Occidentalis. Together they defeated Ugo, son of Lotario II who claimed the throne of Lotaringia, and Bosone, occupying Provence.
881: Carlo il Grosso descends to Rome, where he is crowned emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. In this way he obtains, in addition to the territories that already belong to him, also those of northern Italy.
884: After the death of Charles II, France Occidentalis passed to Charles the Great. The Holy Roman Empire is again united.
887: Arnolfo di Carinzia, son of Carlomanno di Bavaria, lays Carlo il Grosso. The Holy Roman Empire is again broken up. Arnolfo becomes king of France Orientalis, Oddone becomes king of France Occidentalis and Berengario del Friuli becomes king of Italy. Thus ends the Carolingio Empire, the first historical phase of the Holy Roman Empire.
882: Death of Ludovico III the Younger. Charles the Great becomes king of France Orientalis.
11 November 887: Arnolfo di Carinzia becomes king of France Orientalis.
882: Luigi the Younger dies falling from the horse during a hunting trip. Carlomanno II remains the only king of France Occidentalis.
884: Carlomanno II dies (according to the Annales Vedastini, he also died on horseback during a hunting trip) and Carlo il Grosso also takes control of France Occidentalis.
29 February 888: Oddone becomes King of France Occidentalis.
29 August 886: Basil I dies and his son, Leo VI, succeeds him, who becomes emperor of the east.
881: Bear I dies Participatory. Become Doge John II Participatory.
882: John II Participatory devastates Comacchio, whose Count had caused the death of his brother. However, he could not maintain control over the county, because it was papal possession.
887: Death of John II Participation. Become Doge Peter I Candian, who dies after a short time, allowing Peter Tribune.
882: Pope John VIII dies. Marino I succeeds him.
884: Marino I dies, Adriano III succeeds him.
885: Adrian III dies, Stevan V succeeds him.
12 August 875: Ludwig II the Younger dies.
25 December 875: Charles the Calvus, after having crossed the Alps and obtained the title of King of Italy, is crowned Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
6 October 876: Carlo il Calvo dies. The title of emperor of the Holy Roman Empire will go to Carlo il Grosso in 881, while the title of King of Italy in Carlomanno of Bavaria.
870 - Treaty of Meerssen: Charles the Calvo, King of France Occidentalis, and Ludovico the Germanic, King of France Orientalis, divide the France Media (together of Lotaringia and Provence). To Charles the Calvo goes the western part of France Media.
876: After the death of Charles the Calvon, Louis II of France became king of the western Franks.
879: Louis II of France dies. France Occidentalis ends up in the hands of the two sons, Charles II and Louis the Younger, and his wife Adelaide, pregnant with the third son, Charles III of France.
870 - Treaty of Meerssen: Charles the Calvo, King of France Occidentalis, and Ludovico the Germanic, King of France Orientalis, divide the France Media (along with Lotaringia and Provence). To Ludovico the Germanic goes the eastern part of France Media.
876: Ludovico the Germanic died and France Orientalis was divided among his three sons: Carlomanno of Bavaria had, in fact, Bavaria and the title of King of the Eastern Franks and King of Italy, Ludovico III the Younger had Franconia, Saxony and Thuringia, and Carlo the Greater Alemannia.
879: Carlomanno of Bavaria dies and leaves to his brother Charles the Great the title of King of Italy, and to Ludovico III the Younger Bavaria.
872 - Battle of Bathys Ryax: Basil I defeats Paulician heretics.
872: Basil I regains, although for a short time, Cyprus.
875: Basil I regains much of Puglia.
876: Basil I regains the emirate of Bari.
870: The Danes join the Vikings and besieg Dumbarton, Scotland.
31 December 870 - Battle of Englefield: Vikings clash with the Eldorman Æthelwulf of Berkshire. Invaders are forced to retire to Reading and many of the Danes are killed.
871 - Battle of Ashdown: Saxon King Etelredo wins, while Norman King Bagsec remains in the field.
879: Alfred the Great finally defeats the Norman Vikings.
872: Harald I unifies Norway under one crown.
874: The Vikings founded Reykjavik, colonizing Iceland for the first time.
870 - Samarra Anarchy: The rebel Salih ibn Wasif is captured and killed in the Samarra abbasside by the troops of Musa ibn Bugha al-Kabir.
870: Sammara's anarchy ends thanks to the caliph Al-Mu'tamid.
876: Seiwa gives the emperor's throne to his son.
872: John VIII becomes pope.
872: John VIII recognizes the resettlement of Fozio I as Patriarch of Constantinople.
863: After the death of Charles of Provence, Charles the Calvus, who had always wanted to take control of Provence, marched towards it to conquer it, but was stopped by the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, Ludwig II the Younger.
864: Carlo il Calvo promulgates the Edict of Pistres.
869: After the death of Lotario II, taking advantage of the absence of Ludovico II the Younger, Charles the Calvus conquered Lotaringia.
869: The king of Lotaringia Lotarius II dies. The throne passes Charles the Calvus.
863: The king of Provence Charles of Provence dies. His father, Ludwig II the Younger, takes possession of the territory.
869: Ludovico il Germanico comes into conflict with Carlo il Calvo for the possession of Lotaringia, but instead of starting a war he decides to come to terms, signing an agreement the following year.
860 - Siege of Constantinople: The Rus' attack Constantinople, unprepared to respond militarily because already engaged against the Arabs on the Sicilian front. Failing to break through the walls, the Russian forces began to devastate the surroundings of the capital. Emperor Michael III, returning from Sicily, failed to bring the Byzantine troops to victory, but the Russians withdrew the same after plundering the neighbouring villages. Shortly afterwards the Russians converted to Christianity, accepting the religious authority of the Emperor of Constantinople.
863 - Battle of Lalakon: The Byzantine army, led by the uncle of Michele III, Petronas, reconquers the region of Melitene.
September 25, 867: The court chamberlain Basil had Michael III killed in his sleep, becoming the new Roman emperor of the East.
869: Basil I begins the drafting of the Basilika, a collection of laws that will be completed in 892. This reform will be awarded the title of "Second Justinian."
864: Death of Pietro Tradonico. Become Doge Bear I Participate, nephew of Lamb I.
860: The first king of Norway, Harald I, is crowned.
May 11, 868: Publication of the Diamond Sutra
863: Pope Niccolò I excommunicate Fozio I il Grande.
867: Death of Niccolò I. Become Pope Hadrian II.
851: Lotario I, Carlo il Calvo and Ludovico il Germanico meet in Mersen.
855: Death of Lotario I. His son Ludovico il Giovane succeeds him as emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. France Media is divided into Lotaringia, into the hands of Lotario II, and in Provence, into the hands of Charles of Provence.
855: Michele III starts a great expansionist policy, probably following in the footsteps of Justinian. He declares war on the Bulgarians, with the aim of gaining control of the gulf of Burgas and its rich ports.
859: Enna, in Sicily, is liberated by the Arabs.
852: Independence of Venice begins to be recognized by both the Holy Roman Empire and the Eastern Roman Empire
853: The Vikings settled in Ireland and founded Waterford.
852: The Iberian peninsula is now divided into two parts, the Arab one in the South and the Christian Kingdom of Asturias in the North.
855: Benedict III becomes pope.
858: Niccolò I becomes pope.
852: Pope Leo IV builds the lion's walls to protect the Basilica of St. Peter from a possible new attack by the Saracens.
20 June 840: Death of Ludovico the Pius. His three sons Lotario I, Carlo the Calvus and Ludovico the Germanic begin to contend the throne of the Holy Roman Empire, at the time also known as the Carolingian Empire (named after the descendants of Charlemagne).
842: The vow of Strasbourg bears the first witness to the French and German languages.
843 - Treaty of Verdun: The empire is divided between the three pretenders. It is divided into France Occidentalis, who went to Charles the Calvus, France Media, who went to Lotario I (who also maintained the title of emperor of the Holy Roman Empire), and France Orientalis, who went to Ludovico the Germanic.
846: In Italy an army of Saracens besieged Rome and plundered the Basilica of St. Peter.
840: Apulia, which, together with Basilicata and eastern Sicily, was one of the few territories of southern Italy still in Byzantine hands, is reached by the Saracens, who tear Taranto from the Duchy of Benevento.
842: Death of Theophile. Become emperor his son Michael III.
845: Ragusa falls in Sicily, conquered by the Arabs.
847: An independent Islamic group founds Bari, the first emirate in Italy. Bari will be regained in 871.
849 - Battle of Ostia: The Byzantines, with the help of the fleets of the Duchy of Naples and the maritime republics of Amalfi and Sorrento, defeat a fleet of Saracen pirates headed for Rome.
840: A fleet of Saracens from Taranto, which has become their main base in the Italian peninsula, destroys the Venetian ships (in the money of the Doge Pietro Tradonico and the Emperor Teofilo) and plunders some coastal cities in Marche and Dalmatia.
27 January 847: Leo IV becomes pope.
848: The Great Mosque of Samarra is built in Iraq.
Ludovic the Pius, emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
Lotario I, son of Ludovico il Pio.
Carlo il Calvo, son of Ludovico il Pio.
Ludovico il Germanico, son of Ludovico il Pio.
Pietro Tradonico, doge of the Republic of Venice.
The first Swedish Vikings arrive in Russia. (I Rus', from Roslagen)
Viking incursions in Western Europe become more serious. Dorestad is sacked and settled in Ireland.
Ludovic the Pius and his sons struggle for the partition of the Carolingian Empire.
Second iconoclastic period in the Byzantine Empire (813-843).
Amalfi became an independent maritime republic in 839.
822: Lotario I, son of Ludovico il Pio, becomes king of Italy, holding office until 855
823: Ludovico il Pio marries Judith of Bavaria, with whom he has a son, Charles the Calvon.
820: Michael II succeeds Leo V as emperor.
16 June 827 - Landing in Mazara: The Islamic conquest of Sicily begins. In a few days Naro and Agrigento also become Arabs.
829: After several Byzantine counterattacks, Sicily is liberated. However, it will prove to be an ephemeral victory, since the next year the Arabs will return to the island.
2 October 829: Death of Michael II. His son Theophile becomes emperor.
827: Death of the Lamb Attendance. Become the Doge's son, Justinian Attendance.
828: Two Venetian merchants, on orders of Justinian Attending, steal the remains of St Mark, who are brought triumphantly to Venice
829: Death of Justinian Attendance. Become his brother John I Doge Attendance.
820: Muʹammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī writes a book of mathematics, considered the origin of algebra.
5 June 824: Eugenio II becomes pope.
827: After the death of Eugenio II, Valentino becomes pope.
827: After Valentino's death, Gregory IV becomes pope.
Lotario I, son of Ludovico the Pius and king of Italy.
811. Peace of Aachen: The Roman Empire of the East, under Emperor Nicephorus I, officially recognizes the Holy Roman Empire.
813 - Council of Tours: Romance languages are born.
814: Death of Charlemagne. His son Ludwig the Pious ascends to the throne of the Holy Roman Empire.
811: Nicephorus I signs the peace of Aachen.
26 July 811 - Battle of Pliska: The Byzantine army is massacred by the Bulgarian army. Nicephorus I is captured and beheaded. His son Stauracio happens to him as emperor.
2 October 811: Abdication of Stauracio. Become Emperor Michael I Rangabe.
813: Leo V returns triumphantly to Constantinople and, with the abdication of Michael I, becomes emperor.
810: The Doge Obelerius Antenoero, after having tried in vain to approach again the Roman empire of the East, seeks shelter from Charlemagne, who, however, delivers him to Constantinople, where he is imprisoned.
811: Doge Lamb Participatory is elected.
810: King Göttrik plunders and conquers Friesland, which becomes Danish territory.
810: Death of King Göttrik. Hemming succeeds him.
812: Death of King Hemming. Sigfred and Anulo contend the throne of Denmark.
815: Leo V restores the iconoclasm again.
22 June 816: Stephen IV becomes pope.
25 January 817: Pasquale I becomes pope.
Charlemagne, emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
Agnello Partecipazio, doge of the Republic of Venice.
25 December 800: The King of the Franks Charlemagne is crowned Emperor by Pope Leo III. The Holy Roman Empire is born.
28 December 800: Ludovico il Pio, son of Carlo Magno, occupies Barcelona.
803: Treaty of Aachen between Charlemagne and Nicephorus I.
807: Charlemagne attacks the Republic of Venice, but his fleet is destroyed.
31 October 802: Nicephorus I takes power, dethroning the Empress Irene of Athens.
806: Nicephorus I becomes patriarch of Constantinople.
809: Nicephorus I begins a military campaign against the Bulgarians, but it will lead to his death in 811
804: Obelerius Antenorius, in favor of Charlemagne, is elected Doge.
807: Obelerius betrays Charlemagne in favor of Constantinople, suffering a failed attack from the king of the Franks.
805: Emperor De Zong dies. His son Shun Zong succeeds him.
800: First Fuji eruption.
Charlemagne, the first emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
Italus, the oldest tree in Europe, is born.
On June 8, 793, with the assault on Lindisfarne Island, the Viking era formally began in Europe.
792: Pipino the Hunchback, one of the sons of Charlemagne, tries a conspiracy against his father, but is discovered and exiled in a monastery.
795: After several attacks, Tudun, the leader of the people of the Avari, went to the court of Charlemagne and decided to convert to Christianity.
796: Charlemagne sends an army led by his son Pipino of Italy to attack Hungary, carrying out two victorious campaigns.
799: Charlemagne welcomes Pope Leo III to his court, who in November will return to Rome together with a escort. This event is the precursor of the coronation of Charlemagne on December 25th, 800 to the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
790: After several revolts in the areas of the Empire located in Central Asia, Empress Irene is confined to her palace and her son Constantine VI remains to guide the kingdom.
792: Constantine represses VI a revolt and gives back to his mother the role of co-emperor.
797: Irene makes her son Constantine VI blind and exiled, gaining full power over the Byzantine Empire.
797: Irene appoints Finance Superintendent Nicephorus I, who five years later will be the protagonist of a coup against her.
798: Elpidio, the Byzantine strategist who had taken control of Sicily under the title of "Due of the Romans" is removed by Empress Irene, who again occupies the island.
797: Death of Maurizio Galbaio. Becomes doge John Galbaio, and under his reign start again hostilities with the patriarch of Grado, John IV, caused by the anti-freedom politics of the Galbai family.
790: Æthelred I returns to Northumbria after eleven years of exile and lays down Osred II, who is captured and abandoned in the Isle of Man.
792: Viking groups from Norway and Denmark attack Nortumbria, but are rejected.
792: Osred II flees the Isle of Man and with a small army tries to return to power, but is captured and killed by Æthelred I.
796: Æthelred I dies, and Osbald succeeds him, but he reigned for only one month before being exiled to Scotland by the new King Eardwulf.
798: Eardwulf has Wada killed, one of the murderers of Æthelred I.
794: The Nara period ends and the Heian period begins. In this era the first samurai warriors are born and Kyoto is founded at the behest of Emperor Kammu.
25 December 795: Death of Hadrian I, becomes Pope Leo III.
799: Leo III, accused of immoral actions, flees to the Franco Kingdom to the court of Charlemagne who, in November of the same year, will bring him back triumphantly to Rome together with a escort.The year after the pope and the French king will merge the Holy Roman Empire.
Æthelred I, king of the kingdom of Northumbria.
781: Charlemagne descends to Rome to meet Pope Hadrian I to define the territories of the Papal State. The pope renounced Terracina and in return obtained Sabina, and also appointed, at the request of the French king, Pipino king of Italy and Ludovico the Pius king of Aquitaine.
787: Charlemagne gives the pontifical state other territories by the Duchy of Benevento.
788: Istria is completely occupied by the Franks.
September 8, 780: Death of Leo IV. He became the emperor of his son Constantine VI at only nine years of age but, being a minor, the government ended up in the hands of his mother Irene of Athens.
781: Irene entrusts the army to the worn-out Stauracio, who makes many conquests in Thrace, expanding the territories of the empire.
781: Irene appoints governor of Sicily the strategist Elpidio, who rebels but gets control of the island. Elpidio tries to conspiracy against the empress to make emperor basileus Niceforo, the last son still alive of Constantine V. However, the plot fails in 792, when Irene regains Sicily.
787: Irene comes into contact with the Frankish King Charlemagne, to marry Constantine VI with his daughter Rotrude and make an alliance, but the plan fails since Constantine marries the daughter of a Byzantine nobleman.
787 Second Council of Nicaea: veneration of images is permitted, but not their worship.
788: The Franks end the conquest of Istria and consequently the Republic of Venice is completely surrounded.
787: Venetian merchants are removed from Ravenna and Pentapolis. The Doge Maurizio Galbaio harshly condemns this act, supported instead by Pope Hadrian I.
781: Become Emperor Kanmu. Under his reign Japan expanded much its borders.
781: First introduction of Christianity in China.
781: Adriano I crowns Ludovico the Pious King of Aquitaine and Pipino King of Italy. In exchange, the Franco-Charlemagne king gives many territories to the Papal State.
Charlemagne, King of the Franks
770: Charlemagne bride Desired, Longobard princess daughter of Desire.
771: Charles I dies and Charlemagne becomes the only king of the Franks.
772 Saxon Wars: Charlemagne conducts a military campaign to the river Weser, destroying numerous Saxon strongholds.
773: Charlemagne declares war on the Longobards, with the pope's support.
774: Charlemagne defeats Desire. This event marks the beginning of the free domination in Italy (except for Venice and the south, still in the Byzantine hand) and the Carolingian era. Charlemagne exiles Desire and gets the title of King of the Longobards. Some Longobards, however, to preserve their independence, flee to the Duchy of Benevento, which will last until 1059, when it becomes part of the Duchy of Puglia and Calabria.
776: The conquest of Italy ends. Charlemagne sits in the revolt of Longobard Rotgaudo, the last Duke of Friuli.
777 Saxon Wars: Charlemagne defeats the Saxons.
778: The Battle of Roncesvalles is taking place.
770: King Desire marries his daughter, Desired, to Charlemagne, trying to maintain stable relations with the Franks.
770: Initiating hostilities with the Republic of Venice for domination over Istria.
773: Declaration of war by Charlemagne.
774: Desire and his army are defeated by Charlemagne, who takes control of most of the Italian territories. The Longobard Kingdom ends.
773: The Khan of the Bulgari Telerig tries to invade Macedonia, but is defeated by Constantine V, who triumphantly returns to Constantinople.
14 September 775: Constantine V dies of illness in Arcadiopol. His son Leo IV succeeds him.
777: Leo IV expands the borders of the Empire bringing back several military victories against Bulgarians and Arabs.
770: The Doge Maurizio Galbaio declares hostility to the Longobard Kingdom for the expansion of Desire in Istria. This causes the end of the ancient Regio X Venetia et Histria, one of the regions in which the Emperor Augustus divided Italy more than seven hundred years before.
775: The Doge orders the foundation of the diocese of Olivolo.
770: Queen Shotoku's reign ends, she becomes Emperor Konin.
775: The capital Baghdad becomes the largest city in the world known, surpassing Rome and Chang'an.
772: Death of Stephen III. Become Pope Hadrian I.
774: The abbey church of St. John in Müstair is founded
Al-Mahdi, caliph of Caliphate Abbasid
Maurizio Galbaio, doge of the Republic of Venice
14th ride of Halley's Comet.
Weakening of the authority of the Byzantine Empire in Italy.
760: Climb of contrasts between the King of the Franks Pipino the Short and the Duke of Aquitaine, Waifer.
766: Pipino invades Aquitaine with the help of his son Charlemagne.
768: Waifer gathers a small army and marches towards Aquitaine to regain it, but is intercepted by Pipino and sent to escape.
September 24, 768: Death of Pipino the Short. The two sons, Charlemagne and Charles I are crowned simultaneously King of the Franks.
763: Desire gives territories to the Papal State to avoid new Frankish interventions in Italy.
768: Desire meets Charlemagne and promises him the hand of his daughter, Desirata, as the last attempt to interfere with the internal politics of the Franco kingdom and avoid a new intervention in the Italian peninsula.
763 Battle of Anchialus: The Byzantine Empire enters war with the first Bulgarian Empire. Constantine V sent an impressive army that succeeded in inflicting severe defeats on the Bulgarians on the Balkan Mountains.
763: The Byzantine army invades the Papal State in an attempt to regain Rome, but the French king Pipino il Brevo descends into Italy and, after several negotiations with the Longobard king Desire and Pope Paul I frees the territories of the church.
766 siege of Kamacha: The army of Constantine V defeats the abbeys in the fortress of Kamacha, forcing them to retire to Armenia.
761: The Doge Domenico Monegario, following the increasingly progressive weakening of the authority of the Roman Empire of the East in Italy, seeks to strengthen the independence of the Republic of Venice from Constantinople.
764: A revolt, probably due to pro-Byzantine movements, begins and Domenico Monegario is deposed. Maurizio Galbaio is named Doge.
760: In Hereford, the kingdoms of Brycheiniog, Gwent and Powys defeat the kingdom of Mercia, freeing themselves from the influence of the Anglo-Saxons.
761: King Æthelwald Moll of Northumbria faces a rebellion, under a rival pretender to the throne named Oswine.
766: Ahlred ascends to the throne of Northumbria.
760: Fruita I the Cruel begins a campaign of expansion of the Kingdom of Asturias against Muslims.
768: Fruela I is murdered in a conspiracy. Aurelius becomes king of Asturias. Under his reign there were numerous rebellions of slaves, but they were sedated in a short time.
764: The Emperor Junnin is deposed following a revolt. The reign of Empress Shotoku begins.
767: Paul I, the pope who had firmly opposed the iconoclasm, dies. He becomes Pope Stephen III, whose settlement was seriously hindered by the fact that at the time the papal throne had been occupied by the antipope Constantine II, who had placed himself as representative of the Roman aristocracy.
12 April 769: Charlemagne and Carlomanno I send thirteen Frankish bishops to Rome to help Stephen III open a council in which a trial took place against the Antipope Constantine II, who ended with his killing by the crowd.
760: Construction of the Church of Santa Sofia in Benevento.
768: The Kasuga Sanctuary in Nara is built in Japan.
Pipino the Short, King of the Franks
Charles I, King of the Franks
751: Childish III is deposed by Pipino the Short, who takes power and becomes king of the Franks.
756: Pipino il Brevo descends into Italy and frees Rome from the siege of the Longobards, and then gives the pope numerous territories, giving rise to the Papal State.
757: Pipino the Short exchanges gifts with the Byzantine Emperor Constantine V, as a sign of friendship between the Frankish kingdom and the Eastern Roman Empire.
758: Pipino the Short goes to Saxony and with his army he killed Saxons, I ask for their will of resistance.
755: King Astolfo is defeated by the French king Pipino the Short, who forces him to withdraw to Pavia and seek a condition for peace.
756: Astolfo returns to office besieging Rome between January and March, but in April, when the Alpine arches were once again navigable, Pipino il Brevero returned to Italy defeating the Lombard king again.
756: Death of Astolphus. Rachish, his brother, joins Pavia and returns king of the Longobards.
757: The Duke of Tuscia, Desire, marches on Pavia and lays Rachish, taking power.
750: Astolfo begins to invade the exarchate of Italy from the north, conquering Comacchio and Ferrara.
751: The Lombard army conquers Istria and immediately after it reaches Ravenna, the last bulwark of Roman power in Italy. The remnants of the Byzantine army, defeated, withdraw.
753: Pope Stephen II comes into contact with Emperor Constantine V, to convince him to free Italy from the Lombards, as Justinian did with the Ostrogoths, but receiving a negative response.
756 Battle of Marcellae: A Byzantine fleet of 500 ships plunders the coasts of the first Bulgarian empire, which finds itself forced to declare its surrender and to negotiate for peace.
751: The end of the Exarchate of Italy and the conquest of Ravenna by Astolfo marks the definitive independence of the Republic of Venice from the Byzantine Empire.
755: Death of Theodate. Galla is elected Doge. Under his reign the Venetians tried to create an anti-longobard alliance with the pope, but never implemented.
756: Death of Galla. Doge Domenico Monegario is elected.
754: Alfonso I of Asturias conquers León and attaches him to the Kingdom of Asturias.
756: The Emirate of Cordova was born in Muslim Spain.
757: Fruela I the Cruel becomes king of the Kingdom of Asturias.
750: Abū l-...Abbās, called al-Saffā... takes power... ends the Caliphate Omayyade and begins the Abbasid Caliphate.
750: Marwan II, the last caliph of the Umayyade dynasty, flees to Egypt, but is captured and killed by supporters of the Abbasids.
751 Battle of the Talas: The first clashes with China for the dominance over Central Asia begin.
754: Death of Abu I-Abbas. Become al-Mansur caliph.
756: Abd al-Rahman Ibn Mucawiya, member of the Omayyade family, conquers Cordova and is proclaimed emir of al-Andalus. Muslim Spain obtains independence from the Abbasid Caliphate.
15 March 752: Pope Zechariah dies. Become Pope Stephen II.
754: Astolfo is forced by Pipino the Short to donate Lazio to the pope and some territories in Tuscany, Campania and in the Pope's Plain.
756: The Papal State is born.
29 April 757: Death of Pope Stephen II. Become Pope Paul I.
2 April 742: Carlo Magno, son of the butler of Palazzo Pipino il Breve, was born.
742: Become King Childeric III, last of the Merovingi dynasty.
747: Carlomanno, taken from a mystical crisis, retires to a monastery and leaves Pipino the Short as the only butler of the palace.
742: Liutprand annexed the Dukes of Spoleto and Benevento to the Lombard kingdom.
744: Death of Liutprand. Ildebrando becomes king of the Longobards.
744: A revolt of the Dukes of the Longobard Kingdom begins, who wanted the independence of their domains and were in favour of a peace policy with Rome and the Eastern Roman Empire. Rachis, Duke of Friuli, is deposed and rises to power.
747: Historia Langobardorum is written.
749: Rachis siege Perugia, a crucial link between Rome and the Exarchate of Italy, but an intervention by Pope Zaccaria makes him change his mind. For this reason the Assembly of the Longobards, meeting in Milan, declares it fallen. Becomes king his brother Astolfo.
740: An earthquake devastates Constantinople, causing hundreds of deaths and destroying the arch of triumph in the Forum of Theodosius.
18 June 741: Death of Leo III. Constantine V is crowned emperor.
741: While Constantine V is declared dead, his brother-in-law Artavasde usurped the throne.
743: After defeating Artavasde near Sardi and Madrina, Constantine V returns triumphantly to Constantinople and becomes officially emperor.
747: Constantine V makes Constantinople repopulate, transferring inhabitants from Greece and the Aegean Islands, since after the earthquake of 740 and the spread of a pestilence epidemic was almost completely uninhabited.
742: After the reign of the magister militum Domenico Leone (738), Felice Corniola (739), Giovanni Cepanico (740-741) and Giovanni Fabriciaco (742), Teodato becomes Doge of the Republic of Venice. Theodate is historically considered the fourth doge, since since the death of Bear in 737 all subsequent rulers maintained the title of magister militum.
744: Marwān ibn Muņammad ibn Marwān becomes caliph. It begins the last reign of the caliphate Omayyade before the capture of power by the Abbasids in 750.
748: Abū l-'Abbās, with the help of General Abū Muslim, begins the extermination of the Omayyade family. The few survivors were the caliph Marwan ibn Mu·ammad ibn Marwān, who will die two years later during the rebellion, and Abd al-Raʹmān ibn Muʹāwiya, who fled to Spain where, in 756, he will merge the Emirate of al-Andalus, who will then become a caliphate in 929.
745: The first newspaper is printed.
745: The army of the Tang dynasty reaches half a million soldiers.
741: Death of Pope Gregory III. The pontificate of Pope Zechariah begins.
742: Pope Zaccaria meets Liutprand. The latter, furious at the alliance between the pope and the dukes of Spoleto and Benevento, threatens to besiege Rome. Pope Zaccaria, after being ignored by the Byzantine emperor Artavasde, agrees to help Liutprando in the conquest of the ducats.
749: Pope Zechariah meets Rachis, and convinces him to stop besieging Perugia.
742: The Abbey of Fulda is built.
Pipino the Short, butler of the palace of the king of the Franks
732 Battle of the Garonna: The Saracens invade Aquitaine, attacking Bordeaux.
732: The palace butler, Carlo Martello, called by his enemy Oddone I, Duke of Aquitaine, intervenes, restraining the Muslim invasion and rejecting the enemies.
737: Death of King Theodoric IV. Carlo Martello, decided not to choose a successor, placing himself both as butler of palace and as king, since the political value of the Merovingi sovereigns decreased less and less.
737: Carlo Martello conquers Avignon.
732: Liutprand reaffirms his authority over the Duchy of Benevento.
732: Ildebrando, nephew of Liutprando, and Peredeo, Duke of Vicenza, conquer Ravenna. This was a very important event because it seemed to presage the whole unification of Italy under the Longobard crown, but it was however an ephemeral victory. In fact, at the request of Pope Gregory III, the Doge of the Republic of Venice Bear sends a fleet that reconquers the city, re-announcing it to the Exarchate of Italy.
